                                        babble: Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and
                                        Anti-Unification
                                        DAVID CAO∗ , UC San Diego, USA
                                        ROSE KUNKEL∗ , UC San Diego, USA




arXiv:2212.04596v1 [cs.PL] 8 Dec 2022
                                        CHANDRAKANA NANDI, Certora, Inc., USA
                                        MAX WILLSEY, University of Washington, USA
                                        ZACHARY TATLOCK, University of Washington, USA
                                        NADIA POLIKARPOVA, UC San Diego, USA
                                        Library learning compresses a given corpus of programs by extracting common structure from the corpus into
                                        reusable library functions. Prior work on library learning suffers from two limitations that prevent it from
                                        scaling to larger, more complex inputs. First, it explores too many candidate library functions that are not
                                        useful for compression. Second, it is not robust to syntactic variation in the input.
                                           We propose library learning modulo theory (LLMT), a new library learning algorithm that additionally
                                        takes as input an equational theory for a given problem domain. LLMT uses e-graphs and equality saturation
                                        to compactly represent the space of programs equivalent modulo the theory, and uses a novel e-graph anti-
                                        unification technique to find common patterns in the corpus more directly and efficiently.
                                           We implemented LLMT in a tool named babble. Our evaluation shows that babble achieves better
                                        compression orders of magnitude faster than the state of the art. We also provide a qualitative evaluation
                                        showing that babble learns reusable functions on inputs previously out of reach for library learning.
                                        CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering → Functional languages; Automatic programming.
                                        Additional Key Words and Phrases: library learning, e-graphs, anti-unification

                                        1   INTRODUCTION
                                        Abstraction is the key to managing software complexity. Experienced programmers routinely
                                        extract common functionality into libraries of reusable abstractions to express their intent more
                                        clearly and concisely. What if this process of extracting useful abstractions from code could be
                                        automated? Library learning seeks to answer this question with techniques to compress a given
                                        corpus of programs by extracting common structure into reusable library functions. Library learning
                                        has many potential applications from refactoring and decompilation [Jones et al. 2021; Nandi et al.
                                        2020], to modeling human cognition [Wang et al. 2021; Wong et al. 2022], and speeding up program
                                        synthesis by specializing the target language to a chosen problem domain [Ellis et al. 2021].
                                           Consider the simple library learning task in Fig. 1. On the left, Fig. 1a shows a corpus of three
                                        programs in a 2d cad DSL from Wong et al. [2022]. Each program corresponds to a picture composed
                                        of regular polygons, each of which is made of multiple rotated line segments. On the right, Fig. 1b
                                        shows a learned library with a single function (named f0) that abstracts away the construction
                                        of scaled regular polygons. The three input programs can then be refactored into a more concise
                                        form using the learned f0. Whether f0 is the “best” abstraction for this corpus is generally hard to
                                        quantify. For this paper, we follow DreamCoder [Ellis et al. 2021] and use compression as a metric
                                        for library learning, i.e., the goal is to reduce the total size of the corpus in AST nodes (from 208 to
                                        72 Fig. 1). Importantly, the total size of the corpus includes the size of the library: this prevents
                                        ∗ Equal contribution


                                        Authors’ addresses: David Cao, UC San Diego, USA, dmcao@ucsd.edu; Rose Kunkel, UC San Diego, USA, rkunkel@
                                        eng.ucsd.edu; Chandrakana Nandi, Certora, Inc., USA, chandra@certora.com; Max Willsey, University of Washington,
                                        USA, mwillsey@cs.washington.edu; Zachary Tatlock, University of Washington, USA, ztatlock@cs.washington.edu; Nadia
                                        Polikarpova, UC San Diego, USA, npolikarpova@eng.ucsd.edu.
2                                                          Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


             A   Initial corpus (size 208)                                                B    Compressed corpus (size 72)
                 (combine                                                           library:
                   (xform
                                                                                    f0 = λx0 x1 ->        // polygon with x1 sides scaled by x0
                     (repeat (xform line ...) 6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0])
                                                                                      xform
                     [2 0 0 0])
                                                                                        (repeat (xform line ...) x1 [1 (2π / x1) 0 0])
                   (xform
                                                                                        [x0 0 0 0]
                     (repeat (xform line ...) 6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0])
                     [1 0 0 0]))


                 (combine (combine                                                  refactored programs:
                  (xform
                     (repeat (xform line ...) 6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0])     library       (combine
                     [2.25 0 0 0]))                                  learning         (f0 6 2)
                  (xform                                                              (f0 6 1))
                     (repeat (xform line ...) 6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0])
                     [2 0 0 0]))
                   (xform                                                           (combine (combine
                     (repeat (xform line ...) 6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0])                     (f0 6 2.25)
                     [0.5 0 0 0]))                                                    (f0 6 2))
                                                                                      (f0 6 0.5))
                 (combine
                   (xform
                     (repeat (xform line ...) 8 [1 (2π / 8) 0 0])                   (combine
                     [2 0 0 0])                                                       (f0 8 2)
                   (xform                                                             (f0 6 1))
                     (repeat (xfrom line ...) 6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0])
                     [1 0 0 0]))




Fig. 1. Example of library learning. Initial corpus A contains three graphical programs from the “nuts & bolts”
dataset of Wong et al. [2022]. Corpus B is the output of library learning with a single learned function for a
scaled polygon, and the original programs refactored using this function.


library learning from generating too many overly-specific functions, and instead biases it towards
more general and reusable abstractions.
   Library learning can be phrased as a program synthesis problem structured in two phases:
generating candidate abstractions, and then selecting those abstractions that produce the best
(smallest) refactored corpus. The state-of-the-art technique, implemented in DreamCoder [Ellis
et al. 2021], suffers from two primary limitations that hinder scaling library learning to larger and
more realistic inputs.
    • Candidate generation is not precise: DreamCoder generates many candidate abstractions
        that cannot be useful, slowing down the selection phase and the algorithm as a whole.
    • The technique is purely syntactic and hence not robust to superficial variation. For example, a
        human programmer would immediately know that the terms 2 + 1 and 1 + 3 can be refactored
        using the abstraction 𝜆𝑥  𝑥 + 1, because addition commutes; a purely syntactic library
        learning approach cannot generate this abstraction.
In this paper we propose library learning modulo (equational) theories (LLMT)—a new library
learning algorithm that addresses both of the above limitations.
Precise Candidate Generation via Anti-Unification. To make candidate generation more pre-
cise, LLMT leverages two key observations:
    • Useful abstractions must be used in the corpus at least twice. For example, in a corpus of two
        programs 2 + 1 and 3 + 1, there is no need to consider 𝜆𝑥  3 + 𝑥 because it can only be used
        in one place, and hence would only increase the size of the corpus.
    • Abstractions should be “as concrete as possible” for a given corpus. For example, in the
        same corpus with 2 + 1 and 3 + 1, the abstraction 𝜆𝑥  𝑥 + 1 is superior to the more general
        𝜆𝑥 𝑦  𝑥 +𝑦, since both apply to the same two terms, but applying the latter is more expensive
       (it requires two arguments).
In other words, a useful abstraction corresponds to the least general pattern that matches some
pair of subterms from the original corpus; such a pattern can be computed via anti-unification
(AU) [Plotkin 1970]. For example, anti-unifying 2 + 1 and 3 + 1 yields the pattern 𝑋 + 1, and the
desired candidate library function 𝜆𝑥  𝑥 + 1 can be derived by abstracting over the pattern variable
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                             3


                                                       babble
                                                                    candidate                  optimal
                                      e-graph                      abstractions              abstractions
           program        equality                  e-graph                       targeted
                                                                                                  +
            corpus       saturation             anti-unification                    CSE
                                                                                             compressed
                                                                                               corpus


                         equational
                           theory



                                       Fig. 2. babble architecture overview


𝑋 . Similarly, in Fig. 1, the abstraction f0 can be derived by anti-unifying, for example, the blue and
the brown subterms of the corpus.
Robustness via E-Graphs. To make candidate generation more robust, LLMT additionally takes
as input a domain-specific equational theory and uses it to find programs that are semantically
equivalent to the original corpus, but share the most syntactic structure. For example, in the domain
of arithmetic, we expect the theory to contain the equation 𝑋 + 𝑌 ≡ 𝑌 + 𝑋 , which states that
addition is commutative. Given the corpus with terms 2 + 1 and 1 + 3, this rule can be used to
rewrite the second term in to 3 + 1, enabling the discovery of the common abstraction 𝜆𝑥  𝑥 + 1.
   The main challenge with this approach is to search over the large space of programs that
are semantically equivalent to the original corpus. To this end, LLMT relies on the e-graph data
structure and the equality saturation technique [Tate et al. 2009; Willsey et al. 2021] to compute and
represent the space of semantically equivalent programs. To enable efficient library learning over
this space, we propose a new candidate generation algorithm that efficiently computes the set of all
anti-unifiers between pairs of sub-terms represented by an e-graph, using dynamic programming.
   Finally, selecting the optimal library in this setting reduces to the problem of extracting the
smallest term out of an e-graph in the presence of common sub-expressions. This problem is
extremely computationally intensive in its general form, and existing approaches have limited
scalability [Yang et al. 2021]. Instead we propose targeted subexpression elimination: a novel e-graph
extraction algorithm that uses domain-specific knowledge to reduce the search space and readily
supports approximation via beam search to trade off accuracy and efficiency.
babble. We have implemented LLMT in babble, a tool built on top of the egg e-graph li-
brary [Willsey et al. 2021]. The overview of the babble’s workflow is shown in Fig. 2, with
gray boxes representing existing techniques and black boxes representing our contributions.
  We evaluated babble on benchmarks from two sources: compression tasks extracted from
DreamCoder runs [Bowers 2022] and 2d cad programs used to evaluate concept learning in
humans [Wong et al. 2022]. Our evaluation shows that babble outperforms DreamCoder on its
own benchmarks, achieving better compression in orders of magnitude less time. Adding domain-
specific rewrites improves compression even further. We also show that babble scales to the larger
2d cad corpora, which is beyond reach of DreamCoder. We also present and discuss a selection of
abstractions learned by babble, demonstrating that the LLMT approach can learn functions that
match human intuition.
Contributions. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
    • library learning modulo equational theory: a library learning algorithm that can incorporate an
      arbitrary domain-specific equational theory to make learning robust to syntactic variations;
    • e-graph anti-unification: an algorithm that efficiently generates the set of candidate abstrac-
      tions using the mechanism of anti-unification extended from terms to e-graphs;
4                                                  Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


    • targeted common subexpression elimination: a new approximate algorithm for extracting the
      best term from an e-graph in the presence of common sub-expressions.

2   OVERVIEW
We illustrate LLMT via a running example building on Fig. 1. The input corpus in Fig. 1 is written
in a 2d cad DSL by Wong et al. [2022], which features the following primitives:
                     line a line segment from the origin (0, 0) to the point (1, 0)
        combine (𝐹 1, 𝐹 2 ) the union of figures 𝐹 1 and 𝐹 2
            xform (𝐹, 𝜏)    applying transformation 𝜏 to figure 𝐹
        repeat (𝐹, 0, 𝜏)    the empty figure
    repeat (𝐹, 𝑛 + 1, 𝜏)    combine (𝐹, xform ( repeat (𝐹, 𝑛, 𝜏), 𝜏)), similar to a “fold”

   A transformation 𝜏 is a 4-tuple [𝑠, 𝜃, 𝑡𝑥 , 𝑡 𝑦 ] denoting uniformly scaling by a factor of 𝑠, rotating
by 𝜃 radians, and translating by (𝑡𝑥 , 𝑡 𝑦 ) in the 𝑥 and 𝑦 directions respectively. For example, the
green hexagon in Fig. 1 is implemented as:

          xform ( repeat (xform ( line,   [1, 0, −0.5, 0.5/tan(𝜋/6)]), 6, [1, 2𝜋/6, 0, 0]), [2, 0, 0, 0])

That is, a hexagon side xform ( line, [1, 0, −0.5, 0.5/tan(𝜋/6)]) is repeated six times, each time rotated
by another 2𝜋/6 radians, and the resulting unit hexagon is scaled by 2.
   Taking a closer look at the two blue hexagons in Fig. 1, however, we notice something peculiar.
The two occurrences of xform ( repeat . . . , [1, 0, 0, 0]) in Fig. 1 are no-ops: they merely scale a figure
𝐹 by a factor of 1 and neither rotate nor translate it. These redundant transformations would likely
not be there had the code been written by hand or decompiled from a lower-level representation
(by a tool like Szalinski [Nandi et al. 2020]);1 and yet, they are crucial if we hope to learn the
optimal abstraction 𝑓0 with a purely syntactic technique.
   Fig. 3 shows a simplified and “more natural” version of the corpus from Fig. 1, which eliminates
these no-op transformations. As illustrated in the figure, this causes a purely syntactic technique to
learn a different function, 𝑓1 , which abstracts over an unscaled unit polygon. Because the scaling
transformation is now outside the abstraction, it must be repeated five times. As a result, although
the simplified input corpus C from Fig. 3 is smaller than the original corpus A (196 AST nodes
instead of 208), its compressed version D is larger (81 AST nodes instead of 72)! In other words,
syntactic library learning is not robust with respect to semantics-preserving code variations.
   In contrast, our tool babble can take the simplified corpus C as input and still discover, in a
fraction of a second, the scaled polygon abstraction 𝑓0 , yielding the compressed corpus B of size 72.
In the rest of this section, we illustrate how babble achieves this using our new algorithm, library
learning modulo equational theory (LLMT).
Simplified DSL. In the rest of this section we use a tailored version of the 2d cad DSL with the
following additional constructs:
        scale (𝐹, 𝑠)  scale 𝐹 by a factor of 𝑠
    repRot (𝐹, 𝑛, 𝜃 ) a special case of repeat that only performs rotation between iterations
            side (𝑛)  a side of a regular unit 𝑛-gon
These are expressible in the original DSL, and could be even discovered with library learning, given
an appropriate corpus; we treat them as primitives here for the sake of simplifying presentation.


1 We suspect that these transformations ended up in the dataset of Wong et al. [2022] because it was generated programmat-

ically from human-designed abstractions, such as “scaled polygon”.
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                                     5


                                                                              D    Compressed corpus (size 81)
                                             syntactic
  C   Simplified corpus (size 196)            library                 library:
                                             learning                 f1 = λx ->            // polygon with x sides
          (combine                                                        (repeat (xform line ...) x [1 (2π / x) 0 0])
            (...)
            (repeat (xform line ...)                                  refactored programs:
              6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0]))
                                                                      (+
          (combine (combine
                                                                           (xform (f 6) [2 0 0 0])   (+ (+
           (...)
                                                                           (f 6))                      (xform (f 6) [2.25 0 0 0])
           (...))
           (...))                                                     (+                               (xform (f 6) [2 0 0 0]))
                                                                           (xform (f 8) [2 0 0 0])     (xform (f 6) [0.5 0 0 0]))
          (combine                             LLMT                        (f 6))
            (...)
            (repeat (xform line ...)
              6 [1 (2π / 6) 0 0]))
                                                                      Compressed corpus B (size 72)
                                       equational theory:
                                                                       // see Fig. 1
                                       F = xform F [1 0 0 0]
                                       ...




Fig. 3. Difference between syntactic library learning and LLMT. Here the initial corpus C is the simplified
version of corpus A from Fig. 1, with the redundant transformations on the blue subterms removed (unchanged
terms are shown as ellipses). With this modification, syntactic techniques would learn an inferior abstraction
𝑓1 , leading to corpus D, while LLMT still learns the better abstraction 𝑓0 .



2.1    Representing Equivalent Terms with E-Graphs
To exploit equivalences during library learning, babble takes as input a domain-specific equational
theory. For our running example, let us assume that the theory contains a single equation:

                                                   𝐹 ≡ scale (𝐹, 1)                                                             (1)

which stipulates that any figure 𝐹 is equivalent to itself scaled by one. With this equation in hand,
it is possible to “rewrite” corpus C into corpus A, and from there learn the optimal compressed
corpus B by purely syntactic techniques. The challenge is that there are infinitely many alternative
corpora C may be rewritten to; how do we know which to pick to maximize syntactic alignment,
and thus the chance of discovering an optimal abstraction?
   Instead of trying to guess the best equivalent corpus or enumerating them one by one, babble
uses equality saturation [Tate et al. 2009; Willsey et al. 2021]. Equality saturation takes as input a
term 𝑡 and a set of rewrite rules, and finds the space of all terms equivalent to 𝑡 under the given
rules; this is possible due to the high degree of sharing provided by the e-graph data structure,
which can compactly represent the resulting space.
   Fig. 4 (left) shows the e-graph built by equality saturation for the blue term in Fig. 3—represented
in the simplified DSL as repRot ( side (6), 6, 2𝜋/6)—using the rewrite rule (1). The blue part of the
graph represents the original term, and the gray part is added by equality saturation. The solid
rectangles in the e-graph denote e-nodes (which are similar to regular AST nodes), while the dashed
rectangles denote e-classes (which represent equivalence classes of terms). Importantly, the edges
in the e-graph go from e-nodes to e-classes, which enables compact representation of programs
with variation in sub-terms: for example, making e-class 𝑐 1 the first child of the repRot node,
enables it to represent both terms repRot ( side (6), 6, 2𝜋/6) and repRot ( scale ( side (6), 1), 6, 2𝜋/6)
without duplicating their common parts. Furthermore, because e-graphs can have cycles, they
can also represent infinite sets of terms: for example, the e-class 𝑐 1 represents all terms of the
form: side (6), scale ( side (6), 1), scale ( scale ( side (6), 1), 1), etc. Because this e-graph represents
the space of all equivalent terms up to the rewrite (1), the term we seek for library learning, namely
scale ( repRot ( side (6), 6, 2𝜋/6), 1), is also represented in the e-class 𝑐 0 .
6                                                     Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.

                                                                                             c2

                                                                                                       scale    scale
              c0
                   scale       repRot                          c0                            c3
                                                                     scale     repRot                  scale    repRot   2


    c1                                                  c1
                                                                                                  c4
          scale        side           /                      scale      side         /                  scale     side   /


                                                                                2π       6                                   8
          1                     2π          6

                                                                                         1



Fig. 4. (Left) An e-graph representing the space of all programs equivalent the blue term in Fig. 3 under rule
(1). (Right) An e-graph with both the blue and the brown terms from Fig. 3 after equality saturation. All terms
are written in the simplified DSL.


2.2      Candidate Generation via E-Graph Anti-Unification
After building an e-graph from the given corpus by running equality saturation with the given
equational theory, the next step in library learning is to generate candidate patterns that capture
syntactic similarities across the corpus. The challenge is to generate sufficiently few candidates
to make library learning tractable, but sufficiently many to achieve good compression. We illus-
trate candidate generation using the e-graph in Fig. 4 (right), which represents the part of our
corpus consisting of the (saturated) blue and brown terms. Recall that the optimal pattern—which
corresponds to the scaled polygon abstraction 𝑓0 —is:
                                     𝑃0 = scale ( repRot ( side (𝑋 ), 𝑋, 2𝜋/𝑋 ), 𝑌 )                                             (2)
  Prior work on DreamCoder generates patterns by picking a random fragment from the corpus,
and then replacing arbitrarily chosen subterms with pattern variables. For example, to generate the
pattern 𝑃0 , DreamCoder needs to pick the entire brown subterm as a fragment, and then decide to
abstract over its subterms 8 and 2. This approach successfully restricts the set of candidates from all
syntactically valid patterns to only those that have at least one match in the corpus; however, since
there are too many ways to select the subterms to abstract over, this space is still too large to explore
exhaustively beyond small corpora of short programs. In babble, this problem is exacerbated by
equality saturation, since the e-graph often contains exponentially or infinitely more programs
than the original corpus.
Generality Filters. To further prune the set of viable candidates in babble, we identify two classes
of patterns that can be safely discarded, either because they are too concrete or too abstract. First,
a pattern like repRot ( side (8), 𝑋, 2𝜋/8) can be discarded because it is too concrete for this corpus:
the corresponding abstraction can be applied only once, essentially replacing the sole matching
term, repRot ( side (8), 8, 2𝜋/8) with (𝜆𝑥  repeat ( side (8), 𝑥, 2𝜋/8)) 8, which only adds more AST
nodes to the corpus. Second, a pattern like repRot ( side (𝑋 ), 𝑋, 𝑌 ) can be discarded because it is too
abstract for this corpus: everywhere it matches, a more concrete pattern repRot ( side (𝑋 ), 𝑋, 2𝜋/𝑋 )
would also match; using the more concrete pattern leads to better compression, since the actual
arguments in its applications are both fewer and smaller: f 6 2𝜋 /6 and f 8 2𝜋 /8 vs. f 6 and f 8.
   Thus, our first key insight is to restrict the set of candidates to the most concrete patterns
that match some pair of subterms in the (saturated) corpus.2 For example, pattern 𝑃 0 is the most
2 As we discuss in Sec. 3 this can in theory eliminate optimal patterns, but our evaluation shows that it works well in practice.
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                            7


concrete pattern that matches the two terms
                                        scale ( repRot ( side (6), 6, 2𝜋/6), 1)                                          (3)
                                        scale ( repRot ( side (8), 8, 2𝜋/8), 2)                                          (4)
represented in Fig. 4 by the e-classes 𝑐 0 and 𝑐 2 , respectively.
Term Anti-Unification. Computing the most concrete pattern that matches two given terms is
known as anti-unification (AU) [Plotkin 1970; Reynolds 1969]. AU works by a simple top-down
traversal of the two terms, replacing any mismatched constructors by pattern variables. For example,
to anti-unify the terms (3) and (4), we start from the root of both terms; since both AST nodes share
the same constructor scale, it becomes part of the pattern and we recurse into the children. We
eventually encounter a mismatch, where the term on the left is 6 and the term on the right is 8; so
we create a fresh pattern variable 𝑋 and remember the anti-substitution 𝜎 = {( 6, 8) ↦→ 𝑋 }. When
we encounter a mismatch in the denominator of the angle, we look up the pair of mismatched
terms ( 6, 8) in 𝜎; because we already created a variable for this pair, we simply return the existing
variable 𝑋 . The final mismatch is (1, 2) in the second child of scale; since this pair is not yet in 𝜎,
we create a second pattern variable, 𝑌 . At this point, the resulting anti-unifier is the pattern 𝑃0 (2).
   Anti-unifying a single pair of terms is simple and efficient. However, in LLMT we want to
anti-unify all pairs of subterms that can occur in any corpus equivalent (modulo the given equational
theory) to the original3 . Explicitly enumerating all equivalent corpora represented by the e-graph
and then performing AU on each pair of subterms is infeasible. Instead, babble performs anti-
unification directly on the e-graph.
From Terms to E-Classes. We first explain how to anti-unify two e-classes. This operation takes
as input a pair of e-classes and returns a set of dominant anti-unifiers, i.e. a set of patterns that (1)
match both e-classes, and (2) is guaranteed to include the best abstraction among the most concrete
patterns that match pairs of terms represented by the two e-classes.
   Consider computing AU(𝑐 1, 𝑐 4 ) for the e-classes 𝑐 1 and 𝑐 4 in the e-graph from Fig. 4 (right). AU
still proceeds as a top-down traversal, but in this context we must check whether two e-classes have
any constructors in common. In this case they do: both a side constructor and a scale constructor.
Let us first pick the two side constructors and recurse into their only child, computing AU({6}, {8}).
These two e-classes have no matching constructors, so AU simply returns a pattern variable,
similarly to term anti-unification; this yields the first pattern for 𝑐 1 and 𝑐 4 : side 𝑋 .
   Recall, however, that 𝑐 1 and 𝑐 4 also have matching scale constructors. This is where things get
interesting: these constructors are involved in a cycle (their first child is the parent e-class itself). If
we let AU follow this cycle, the set of anti-unifiers becomes infinite:
                             AU(𝑐 1, 𝑐 4 ) = {side 𝑋 } ∪ {scale 𝑝 1 | 𝑝 ∈ AU(𝑐 1, 𝑐 4 )}
Fortunately, we can show that side 𝑋 dominates all the other patterns from this set, because their
pattern variables—in this case, just 𝑋 —match the same e-classes, but they are also larger (in Sec. 4
we show how this domination relation lets us prune other patterns, not just those caused by cycles).
Hence AU(𝑐 1, 𝑐 4 ) simply returns {side 𝑋 }.
  Following the same logic for the root e-classes of the two polygons, 𝑐 0 and 𝑐 2 , AU(𝑐 0, 𝑐 2 ) yields
that pattern 𝑃0 (2), which is required to learn the optimal abstraction.
From E-Classes to E-Graphs. To obtain the set of all candidate abstractions, we need to perform
anti-unification over all pairs of e-classes in the e-graph. Clearly, these computations have overlap-
ping subproblems (for example, we have to compute AU(𝑐 1, 𝑐 4 ) as part of AU(𝑐 0, 𝑐 2 ) and AU(𝑐 0, 𝑐 3 )).
3 A careful reader might be wondering if we need to compute infinitely many anti-unifiers because there might be infinitely

many equivalent corpora. As we explain shortly, there are only finitely many patterns that are viable abstraction candidates.
8                                             Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.

                                                                     c2
                                                                              app         scale
            c0
                                                                              c3
                  scale             app        app                                  app             2


                                                     f0         f1

                           1              6               λxy         λx                  8


                                                           …              …

Fig. 5. The e-graph from Fig. 4 (right) with applications of 𝑓0 and 𝑓1 depicted in red. We show the unchanged
parts of the graph representing the unit hexagon and octagon as corresponding shapes; we also omit some of
the gray e-nodes added in the previous stage.


To avoid duplicating work, babble uses an efficient dynamic programming algorithm that processes
all pairs of e-classes in a bottom-up fashion.

2.3   Candidate Selection via Targeted Common Subexpression Elimination
We now illustrate the final step of library learning in babble: given the set of candidate abstractions
generated by e-graph anti-unification, the goal is to pick a subset that gives the best compression
for the corpus as a whole. For example, the candidates generated for the corpus from Fig. 3 include:
            𝑓0   = 𝜆𝑥 𝑦  scale ( repRot ( side (𝑥), 𝑥, 2𝜋/𝑥), 𝑦)                   scaled regular 𝑥-gon
            𝑓1   = 𝜆𝑥  repRot ( side (𝑥), 𝑥, 2𝜋/𝑥)                                 regular 𝑥-gon
            𝑓2   = 𝜆𝑦  scale ( repRot ( side (6), 6, 2𝜋/6), 𝑦)                     scaled hexagon
It is not immediately clear which abstraction is better: 𝑓0 matches more terms than 𝑓2 , but 𝑓2 requires
fewer arguments (so if we have enough scaled hexagons in the corpus and only one octagon, it
might be better to leave the octagon un-abstracted). On the other hand, 𝑓1 might be better, since it
does not introduce the redundant transformation on the blue hexagons. Finally, if we pick 𝑓0 and
𝑓2 together, we can also abstract the definition of 𝑓2 as 𝑓0 6, thereby getting additional reuse! As
you can see, candidate selection is highly non-trivial, since it needs to take into account the choice
between different equivalent programs in the e-graph, and the fact that some abstractions can be
defined using others.
Reduction to E-Graph Extraction. To overcome this difficulty, we once again leverage e-graph
and equality saturation. Our second key insight is that selecting the optimal subset of abstractions
can be reduced to the problem of extracting the smallest term from an e-graph in the presence of
common sub-expressions.
    To illustrate this reduction, let us limit our attention to only two candidate abstractions, 𝑓0 and
𝑓1 , defined above. babble converts each of the candidate patterns and its corresponding abstraction
into a rewrite rule that introduces a local 𝜆-abstraction followed by application into the corpus; for
our two abstractions these rules are:
                            scale ( repRot ( side (𝑋 ), 𝑋, 2𝜋/𝑋 ), 𝑌 ) ⇒ 𝑓0 𝑋 𝑌                                   (5)
                                       repRot ( side (𝑋 ), 𝑋, 2𝜋/𝑋 ) ⇒ 𝑓1 𝑋                                       (6)
The result of applying these rules to the e-graph from Fig. 4 (right) is shown in Fig. 5. For example,
you can see that the e-class 𝑐 2 (which represents the scale-2 octagon) now stores an alternative
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                           9


representation: 𝑓0 8 2. The e-class 𝑐 0 (unit hexagon) has representations using either 𝑓0 or 𝑓1 , because
this class matches both rewrite rules (5) and (6) above. Note also that because the definitions of
the 𝜆-abstractions are also stored in the e-graph, equality saturation can use the above rewrite
rules inside their bodies, to make one function use another: for example, one term stored for the
definition of 𝑓0 is

                                             𝜆𝑥 𝑦  scale (𝑓1 𝑥, 𝑦).

   Once we have built the version of the e-graph with local lambdas for all the candidate abstractions,
all that is left is to extract the smallest term out of this e-graph. The tricky part is that we want to
count the size of the duplicated lambdas only once. For example, in Fig. 5, 𝑓0 is applied twice (in 𝑐 0
and 𝑐 2 ); if term extraction were to choose both of these e-nodes, we want to treat their first child
(the definition of 𝑓0 ) as a common sub-expression, whose size contributes to the final expression
only once. Intuitively, this is because we can “float” these lambdas into top-level let-bindings,
thereby defining 𝑓0 only once, and replacing each local lambda with a name.
   Extraction with common sub-expressions is a known but notoriously hard problem, which is
traditionally reduced to integer linear programming (ILP) [Wang et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2021].
Because the scalability of the ILP approach is very limited, we have developed a custom extraction
algorithm, which scales better by using domain-specific knowledge and approximation.
Extraction Algorithm. The main idea for making extraction more efficient is that for library
learning we are only interested in sharing a certain type of sub-terms: namely, the 𝜆-abstractions.
Hence for each e-class we only need to keep track of the the best term for each possible library (i.e.
each subset of 𝜆-abstractions). More precisely, for each e-class and library, we keep track of (1) the
smallest size of the library (2) the smallest size of the program refactored using this library (counting
the 𝜆-abstractions as a single node). We compute and propagate this information bottom-up through
the e-graph. Once this information is computed for the root e-class (that represents the entire
corpus), we can simply choose the library with the smallest total size.
   For example, for the e-class 𝑐 2 from Fig. 5, with the empty library ∅, the size of library is 0 and
the size of the smallest program (scale ( repRot ( side (8), 8, 2𝜋/8), 2)) is 9; with the library {𝑓0 }, the
size of the library is 9 and the size of the smallest program (𝑓0 2 8) is 3; while with the library {𝑓1 },
the size of the library is 7 and the size of the smallest program (scale (𝑓1 8, 2)) is 4. Clearly for this
e-class introducing library functions is not paying off yet (0 + 9 < 7 + 4 < 9 + 3), since each one
can be only used once. This situation changes, however, as we move up towards the root. Already
for the parent e-class of 𝑐 0 and 𝑐 2 , the cost of introducing {𝑓0 } and {𝑓1 } is amortized: the size of
the smallest program is 17 with the empty library and 7 with either {𝑓0 } or {𝑓1 }, so {𝑓1 } is already
worthwhile to introduce (9 + 7 < 0 + 17). Including even more programs with scaled polygons
eventually makes the library {𝑓0 } the most profitable of the four subsets.
   Since in a larger corpus, keeping track of all subsets of candidate abstractions is not feasible,
babble provides a way to trade off scalability and precision by using a beam search approach.

3   LIBRARY LEARNING OVER TERMS
In this section we formalize the problem of library learning over a corpus of terms and motivate
our first core contribution: generating candidate abstractions via anti-unification. Sec. 4 generalizes
this formalism to library learning over an e-graph. For simplicity of exposition, our formalization
of library learning is first order, that is, the initial corpus does not itself contain any 𝜆-abstractions,
and all the learned abstractions are first-order functions (the babble implementation does not have
this limitation).
10                                                     Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


3.1    Preliminaries
Terms. A signature Σ is a set of constructors, each associated with an arity. T (Σ) denotes the set
of terms over Σ, defined as the smallest set containing all 𝑠 (𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡𝑘 ) where 𝑠 ∈ Σ, 𝑘 = arity(𝑠),
and 𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡𝑘 ∈ T (Σ). We abbreviate nullary terms of the form 𝑠 () as 𝑠. The size of a term size(𝑡) is
defined in the usual way (as the number of constructors in the term). We use subterms(𝑡) to denote
the set of all subterms of 𝑡 (including 𝑡 itself). We assume that Σ contains a dedicated variadic tuple
constructor, written ⟨𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡𝑛 ⟩, which we use to represent a corpus of programs as a single term
(⟨⟩ does not contribute to the size of a term).
Patterns. If X is a denumerable set of variables, T (Σ, X) is a set of patterns, i.e. terms that can
contain variables from X. A pattern is linear if each of its variables occurs only once: ∀𝑋 ∈
vars(𝑝).occurs(𝑋, 𝑝) = 1. A substitution 𝜎 = [𝑋 1 ↦→ 𝑝 1, . . . , 𝑋𝑛 ↦→ 𝑝𝑛 ] is a mapping from variables
to patterns. We write 𝜎 (𝑝) to denote the application of 𝜎 to pattern 𝑝, which is defined in the
standard way. We define the size of a substitution size(𝜎) as the total size of its right-hand sides.
    A pattern 𝑝 is more general than (or matches) 𝑝 ′, written 𝑝 ′ ⊑ 𝑝, if there exists 𝜎 such that
𝑝 = 𝜎 (𝑝); we will denote such a 𝜎 by match(𝑝 ′, 𝑝). For example 𝑋 + 1 ⊑ 𝑋 + 𝑌 with match(𝑋 +
  ′

1, 𝑋 + 𝑌 ) = [𝑌 ↦→ 1]. The relation ⊑ is a partial order on patterns, and induces an equivalence
relation 𝑝 1 ∼ 𝑝 2 ≜ 𝑝 1 ⊑ 𝑝 2 ∧ 𝑝 2 ⊑ 𝑝 1 (equivalence up to variable renaming). In the following, we
always distinguish patterns only up to this equivalence relation.
    The join of two patterns 𝑝 1 ⊔ 𝑝 2 —also called their anti-unifier—is the least general pattern that
matches both 𝑝 1 and 𝑝 2 ; the join is unique up to ∼. Note that ⟨T (Σ, X), ⊑, ⊔, ⊤ = 𝑋 ⟩ is a join
semi-lattice (part of Plotkin’s subsumption lattice [Plotkin 1970]). Consequently, the join can be
generalized to an arbitrary set of patterns.
    A context C is a pattern with a single occurrence of a distinguished variable ◦. We write C [𝑝]—𝑝
in context C—as a syntactic sugar for [◦ ↦→ 𝑝] (C). A rewrite rule 𝑅 is a pair of patterns, written
𝑝 1 ⇒ 𝑝 2 . Applying a rewrite rule 𝑅 to a term or pattern 𝑝, written 𝑅(𝑝) is defined in the standard
way: 𝑅(𝑝) = (match(𝑝, 𝑝 1 )) (𝑝 2 ) if 𝑝 ⊑ 𝑝 1 and undefined otherwise. A pattern 𝑝 can be re-written
in one step into 𝑞 using a rule 𝑅, written 𝑝 →𝑅1 𝑞, if there exists a context C such that 𝑝 = C [𝑝 ′]
and 𝑞 = C [𝑅(𝑝 ′)]. The reflexive-transitive closure of this relation is the rewrite relation → R , where
R is a set of rewrite rules.
Compressed Terms. Compressed terms T̂ (Σ, X) are of the form:
                               𝑡ˆ ::= 𝑋 | 𝑠 (𝑡ˆ1, . . . , 𝑡ˆ𝑘 ) | (𝜆𝑋 1 . . . 𝑋𝑛  𝑡ˆ) 𝑡ˆ1 . . . 𝑡ˆ𝑛
In other words, compressed terms may contain applications of a 𝜆-abstraction with zero or more
binders to the same number of arguments. Note that this is a first-order language in the sense
that all abstractions are fully applied. Importantly, we define size(𝑡ˆ) in such a way that multiple
occurrences of a 𝜆-abstraction are only counted once. For simplicity of accounting, the size of an
application (𝜆𝑋  𝑡ˆ1 ) 𝑡ˆ2 is defined as size(𝑡ˆ1 ) + size(𝑡ˆ2 ), that is, abstraction nodes themselves do
                                                      Í
not add to the size.4
                                                           𝛽
   Beta-reduction on compressed terms, denoted 𝑡ˆ1 →1 𝑡ˆ2 , is defined in the usual way:
                                                                  𝛽
                                           (𝜆𝑋  𝑡ˆ1 ) 𝑡ˆ2 →1 [𝑋 ↦→ 𝑡ˆ2 ] (𝑡ˆ1 )
where substitution on compressed terms is the standard capture-avoiding substitution for 𝜆-calculus.
Note that because our language is first-order and has no built-in recursion, it is strongly normalizing
(the proof of this statement, as well as other proofs omitted from this section, can be found in
the supplementary material). Hence, the order of 𝛽-reductions is irrelevant, and without loss of
4 Hereafter, 𝑎 stands for a sequence of elements of syntactic class 𝑎 and 𝜖 denotes the empty sequence.
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                      11



          ⟨𝑓 (𝑔(𝑎) + 𝑔(𝑎)) + (𝑔(1) + ℎ(2))                          ⟨ 𝑓ˆ2 𝑔(𝑎) 1 2, 𝑓ˆ2 𝑔(𝑏) 2 3, 𝑓ˆ1 5 6⟩   where
          , 𝑓 (𝑔(𝑏) + 𝑔(𝑏)) + (𝑔(3) + ℎ(4))                         𝑓ˆ1 = 𝜆𝑌 𝑍  𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 )
          , 𝑔(5) + ℎ(6)⟩                                            𝑓ˆ2 = 𝜆𝑋 𝑌 𝑍  𝑓 (𝑋 + 𝑋 ) + 𝑓ˆ1 𝑌 𝑍

Fig. 6. Library learning. Left: initial term (size 29). Right: an optimal solution with two abstractions, one of
which uses the other (size 26). A solution with 𝑓ˆ2 = 𝜆𝑋 𝑌 𝑍  𝑓 (𝑔(𝑋 ) + 𝑔(𝑋 )) + 𝑓ˆ1 𝑌 𝑍 also has size 26.


generality we can define evaluation on compressed terms, 𝑡ˆ1 →𝛽 𝑡ˆ2 , to follow applicative order, i.e.
innermost 𝛽-redexes are reduced first. As a result, any application reduced during evaluation has
the form (𝜆𝑋  𝑝 1 ) 𝑝 2 , that is, neither the body 𝑝 1 nor the actual arguments 𝑝 2 contain any redexes
(and hence any 𝜆-abstractions). This simplifies several aspects of our formalization; for example,
there is no need for 𝛼-renaming, since with no binders in 𝑝 1 , no variable capture can occur.
Problem Statement. We can now formalize the library learning problem as follows: given a term
𝑡 ∈ T (Σ), the goal is to find the smallest compressed term 𝑡ˆ ∈ T̂ (Σ, X) that evaluates to 𝑡 (i.e.
𝑡ˆ →𝛽 𝑡). The reason such 𝑡ˆ may be smaller than 𝑡, is that it may contain multiple occurrences of the
same 𝜆-abstraction (applied to different arguments), whose size is only counted once. An example
is shown in Fig. 6.
   Although in full generality the solution might include nested lambdas with free variables (defined
in the outer lambdas), in the rest of the paper we restrict our attention to global library learning,
where all lambdas are closed terms. This is motivated by the purpose of library learning to discover
reusable abstraction for a given problem domain. The solution in Fig. 6 already has this form.

3.2   Pattern-Based Library Learning
At a high-level, our approach to library learning is to use patterns that occur in the original corpus
as candidate bodies for 𝜆-abstractions in the compressed corpus. Looking at the example in Fig. 6, it
is not immediately obvious that using just the patterns from the original corpus is sufficient, since
the body of 𝑓2 contains an application of 𝑓1 . Perhaps surprisingly, this is not an issue: the key idea
is that we can compress 𝑡 into 𝑡ˆ by inverting the evaluation 𝑡ˆ →𝛽 𝑡, and because the evaluation
order is applicative, the rewritten sub-term at every step will not contain any 𝛽-redexes.
Compression. More formally, given a pattern 𝑝, let us define its compression rule (or 𝜅-rule for
short) as the rewrite rule
                            𝜅 (𝑝) ≜ 𝑝 ⇒ (𝜆𝑋  𝑝) 𝑋                where 𝑋 = vars(𝑝)
In other words, 𝜅 (𝑝) will replace any term matching 𝑝 with an application of a function whose body
is exactly 𝑝. For example, if 𝑝 = 𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 ), its 𝜅-rule is 𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 ) ⇒ (𝜆𝑌 𝑍  𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 )) 𝑌 𝑍 .
Note that on the right-hand side of this rule only the free occurrences of 𝑌 and 𝑍 will be substituted
during rewriting; the bound 𝑌 and 𝑍 will be left unchanged, following the usual semantics of
substitution for 𝜆-calculus. For example, this rule can rewrite the third term in Fig. 6 (left) as follows:
                                            𝜅 (𝑔 (𝑌 )+ℎ (𝑍 ))
                           𝑔(5) + ℎ(6) →1                       (𝜆𝑌 𝑍  𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 )) 5 6
                            𝜅 (𝑝 )       𝜅 (𝑝 )
A sequence of 𝜅-rewrites 𝑡 →1 1 . . . →1 𝑛 𝑡ˆ, where all 𝑝𝑖 ∈ P, is called a compression of 𝑡 into 𝑡ˆ
using patterns P and written 𝑡 →𝜅 ( P) 𝑡ˆ. We can now show that the library learning problem is
equivalent to finding the smallest compression of 𝑡 using only patterns that occur in 𝑡.
   Theorem 3.1 (Soundness and Completeness of Pattern-Based Library Learning). For any
term 𝑡 ∈ T (Σ) and compressed term 𝑡ˆ ∈ T̂ (Σ, X):
12                                                Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


(Soundness) If 𝑡 compresses into 𝑡ˆ, then 𝑡ˆ evaluates to 𝑡: ∀P.𝑡 →𝜅 ( P) 𝑡ˆ =⇒ 𝑡ˆ →𝛽 𝑡.
(Completeness) If 𝑡ˆ is a solution to the (global) library learning problem, then 𝑡 compresses into 𝑡ˆ
     using only patterns that have a match in 𝑡: 𝑡ˆ ∈ arg min𝑡ˆ′ →𝛽 𝑡 size(𝑡ˆ′) =⇒ 𝑡 →𝜅 ( P) 𝑡ˆ, where
     P = {𝑝 ∈ T (Σ, X) | 𝑡 ′ ∈ subterms(𝑡), 𝑡 ′ ⊑ 𝑝}.

     The proof can be found in the supplementary material.
Example. Consider once again the library learning problem in Fig. 6. Here the set of patterns used
to compress the original corpus into the solution on the right is:

                       𝑝 1 = 𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 )              𝑝 2 = 𝑓 (𝑋 + 𝑋 ) + 𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 )

Rewriting the first term of the corpus proceeds in two steps (the redexes of 𝜅-steps are highlighted):

                                       𝜅 (𝑝 2 )
     𝑓 (𝑔(𝑎) + 𝑔(𝑎)) + (𝑔(1) + ℎ(2)) →1
                                                                                                 𝜅 (𝑝 1 )
                (𝜆𝑋 𝑌 𝑍  𝑓 (𝑋 + 𝑋 ) + 𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 )) 𝑔(𝑎) 𝑔(𝑎) (𝑔(1) + ℎ(2)) →1
                     (𝜆𝑋 𝑌 𝑍  𝑓 (𝑋 + 𝑋 ) + (𝜆𝑌 𝑍  𝑔(𝑌 ) + ℎ(𝑍 )) 𝑌 𝑍 ) 𝑔(𝑎) 𝑔(𝑎) (𝑔(1) + ℎ(2))

In other words, we first rewrite the entire term using 𝑝 2 , and then rewrite inside the body of
the introduced abstraction using 𝑝 1 (note that this order of compression is the inverse of the
applicative evaluation order). The second term of the corpus compresses analogously; the third
term compresses in a single step using 𝑝 1 . Although this is not obvious from the rewrite sequence
above, the resulting compressed corpus is indeed smaller than the original thanks to sharing of
both 𝜆-abstractions, as illustrated on the right of Fig. 6.
Library Learning as Term Rewriting. Theorem 3.1 reduces library learning to a term rewriting
problem. Namely, given a term 𝑡 and a finite set of rewrite rules R = {𝜅 (𝑝) | 𝑡 ′ ∈ subterms(𝑡), 𝑡 ′ ⊑
𝑝}, our goal is to find a minimal-size term 𝑡ˆ such that 𝑡 → R 𝑡ˆ, which is a standard formulation in
term rewriting. Unfortunately, this particular problem is notoriously difficult because (a) the rule
set R is very large for any non-trivial term 𝑡, and (b) our size function is non-local (it takes sharing
into account) In the rest of this section we discuss how we can prune the rule set R to reduce it to
a tractable size. Sec. 5 discusses how we tackle the remaining term rewriting problem using the
equality saturation technique [Tate et al. 2009; Willsey et al. 2021].

3.3     Pruning Candidate Patterns
In this section, we discuss which patterns can be discarded from consideration when constructing
the set of 𝜅-rules R for the term rewriting problem.
Cost of a Pattern. Consider a compression 𝑡 →𝜅 ( P) 𝑡ˆ where each pattern 𝑝 ∈ P is used some
                                      𝑝          𝑝
number 𝑛 times, with substitutions 𝜎1 , . . . , 𝜎𝑛 . We can break down the total amount of compression
into contributions of individual patterns:
                                                     ∑︁
                                                                   𝑝          𝑝
                            size(𝑡ˆ) − size(𝑡) =         cost(𝑝, {𝜎1 , . . . 𝜎𝑛 })
                                                        𝑝 ∈P


The cost of a pattern 𝑝, in turn, consists of three components. The cost of introducing the abstraction
is the size of its body, i.e. size(𝑝). The cost of using an abstraction—use(𝑝, 𝜎) (7)—includes the
application itself and the size of the arguments. The cost saved by using an abstraction—save(𝑝, 𝜎)
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                           13


(8)—is just the cost of the term matched by 𝑝 (i.e. the redex of the corresponding 𝜅-step).
                                ∑︁
             use(𝑝, 𝜎) = 1 +         size(𝜎 (𝑋 ))                                                        (7)
                                𝑋 ∈vars(𝑝)
                                                          ∑︁
             save(𝑝, 𝜎) = size(𝜎 (𝑝)) = size(𝑝) +                   occurs(𝑋, 𝑝) · (size(𝜎 (𝑋 )) − 1)    (8)
                                                       𝑋 ∈vars(𝑝)

The total cost of 𝑝 is the cost of introducing the abstraction paid a single time, plus the cost of each
use, minus what you save for each application:
                                                           ∑︁
                    cost(𝑝, {𝜎1, . . . , 𝜎𝑛 }) = size(𝑝) +    (use(𝑝, 𝜎𝑖 ) − save(𝑝, 𝜎𝑖 ))            (9)
                                                             𝜎𝑖

When 𝑝 is linear (all occurs(𝑋, 𝑝) = 1), the cost depends only on 𝑛 but not on the substitutions 𝜎𝑖 :
                                                          ∑︁
                   cost(𝑝, {𝜎1, . . . , 𝜎𝑛 }) = size(𝑝) +    (1 − size(𝑝) + |vars(𝑝)|)         (10)
                                                             𝜎𝑖
                                              = size(𝑝) + 𝑛 · (1 − size(𝑝) + |vars(𝑝)|)                 (11)
We can show that a pattern 𝑝 with a non-negative cost can be safely discarded, that is: there exists
another compression using only P \ {𝑝}, whose result is at least as small.
Trivial Patterns. Based on this analysis, any linear pattern 𝑝 with skeleton(𝑝) ≤ 1 can be discarded,
where skeleton(𝑝) = size(𝑝) − |vars(𝑝)| is the size of 𝑝’s “skeleton”, i.e. it’s body without the
variables. Intuitively, the skeleton of 𝑝 is simply too small to pay for introducing an application. In
this case, cost(𝑝, _) > 0 independently of how many times it is used. We refer to such patterns as
trivial. Examples of trivial patterns are 𝑋 and 𝑋 + 𝑌 .
Patterns with a Single Match. We can show that patterns with only a single match in the corpus
can also be discarded. If 𝑝 has a single match in 𝑡, then it can appear at most once in any compression
of 𝑡. If 𝑝 is linear, cost(𝑝, _) = 1 + |vars(𝑝)|, which is always positive, so 𝑝 can be discarded. But
what about non-linear patterns, where even a single 𝜅-step can decrease size thanks to variable
reuse? It turns out that any non-linear pattern with a single match can always be replaced by a
nullary pattern (with no variables) that is more optimal.
   Without loss of generality, assume that 𝑝 has a single variable 𝑋 that occurs 𝑚 > 1 times, and let its
                         𝜅 (𝑝)
sole 𝜅-step be 𝜎 (𝑝) →1        (𝜆𝑋  𝑝) 𝜎 (𝑋 ). The size of the right-hand side is size(𝑝) +1+size(𝜎 (𝑋 )),
or, rewritten in terms of 𝑝’s skeleton: 1 + (skeleton(𝑝) + 𝑚) + size(𝜎 (𝑋 )). Instead, we can rewrite
the same redex 𝜎 (𝑝) → {𝑅 } 𝑝 ′ using 𝑚 applications of the rule 𝑅 ≜ 𝜎 (𝑋 ) ⇒ (𝜆𝜖  𝜎 (𝑋 )) 𝜖. This
is a 𝜅-rule for a nullary pattern 𝜎 (𝑋 ) with no variables (hence the corresponding 𝜆-abstraction
has zero binders). The size of 𝑝 ′ obtained in this way is size(𝜎 (𝑋 )) + 𝑚 + skeleton(𝑝) (where the
former is the size of the shared 𝜆-abstraction, 𝑚 is the number of applications, and skeleton(𝑝) is
the size of the term around the applications). As you can see, this term is one smaller than the one
we get by applying 𝑝. Intuitively, this result says that instead of using a non-linear pattern that
occurs only once, it is better to perform common sub-expression elimination.
Parameterization Lattice. Eliminating from consideration all patterns with fewer than two
matches in the corpus suggests an algorithm for generating a complete set P of candidate patterns:
(1) start from the set P 2 (𝑡) = {𝑡 1 ⊔ 𝑡 2 | 𝑡𝑖 ∈ subterms(𝑡)} of all pairwise joins of subterms of the
input program, (2) explore all elements of the subsumption semi-lattice above those patterns, by
gradually replacing sub-patterns with variables, until we hit trivial patterns at the top of the lattice.
We will refer to this semi-lattice above P 2 (𝑡) as the parametrization lattice of 𝑡, denoted P (𝑡). A
fragment of P (𝑡) for 𝑡 = ⟨𝑓 (𝑎 + 𝑏), 𝑓 (𝑎 + 𝑐), 𝑓 (𝑏 + 𝑐)⟩ is shown in Fig. 7 (left).
14                                                Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.

                       X
                                                                                     f(X + Y)
                    f(X)
              f(X + Y)
                                                                                                        f(X + c)
                                                                   f(a + X)                f(X + X)
         f(a + X)               f(X + c)


                                                                        f(a + a)      f(a + c)     f(c + c)
        f(a + b)     f(a + c)    f(b + c)         t


Fig. 7. Left: fragment of the parametrization lattice for the term 𝑡 = ⟨𝑓 (𝑎 + 𝑏), 𝑓 (𝑎 + 𝑐), 𝑓 (𝑏 + 𝑐)⟩; only filled
black circles correspond to candidate patterns: hollow circles match fewer than two terms and gray circles
are trivial. Right: an example where is it insufficient to consider pairwise joins to obtain an optimal pattern.


Approximation. In practice, computing the set P 2 (𝑡) is feasible: although there are quadratically
many pairs of subterms, most of them do not have a common constructor at the root, and hence their
join is trivially 𝑋 . An example is the join of 𝑡 with any of its subterms in Fig. 7 (left). Unfortunately,
generalizing the patterns from P 2 (𝑡) according to the parameterization lattice (Fig. 7) is expensive.
For this reason, babble adopts an approximation and simply uses P 2 (𝑡) as the set of candidates.
   This approximation makes our pattern generation theoretically incomplete. Consider a pattern
𝑝 ∈ P (𝑡) \ P 2 (𝑡); there are two reasons why we might need 𝑝 in the optimal compression of 𝑡:
   (1) there is no 𝑝 ′ ∈ P 2 (𝑡) with the same set of matches as 𝑝, or
   (2) there is such a 𝑝 ′ but it has few enough matches that its larger size does not pay off.
   The first kind of incompleteness occurs when 𝑝 matches a set of subterms 𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡𝑛 (𝑛 > 2),
whose join is distinct from all their pairwise joins (otherwise some 𝑡𝑖 ⊔ 𝑡 𝑗 ∈ P 2 (𝑡) would also
match all 𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡𝑛 ). An example is shown in Fig. 7 (right), where the three subterms in question
are 𝑓 (𝑎 + 𝑎), 𝑓 (𝑎 + 𝑐), and 𝑓 (𝑐 + 𝑐). In this case, an optimal compression might use the pattern
𝑓 (𝑋 + 𝑌 ) to rewrite all three subterms, but our approximation would only include the patterns
𝑓 (𝑎 + 𝑋 ), 𝑓 (𝑋 + 𝑋 ), and 𝑓 (𝑋 + 𝑐), each of which can rewrite only two of the three subterms.
   The second kind of incompleteness occurs when there exists 𝑝 ′ ∈ P 2 (𝑡) that has the same set of
matches as 𝑝, despite being strictly more specific, and yet using 𝑝 ′ instead of 𝑝 still doe not pay off.
The understand when this happens, consider the difference in costs between 𝑝 and 𝑝 ′, assuming
that they are both used to rewrite the same 𝑛 subterms (i.e. their save cost is the same):
                                                                  ∑︁
              cost(𝑝 ′, 𝜎 ′) − cost(𝑝, 𝜎) = size(𝑝 ′) − size(𝑝) +    (use(𝑝 ′, 𝜎𝑖′) − use(𝑝, 𝜎𝑖 ))
                                                                        𝑖
                                                                       ∑︁
                                            = size(𝑝 ′) − size(𝑝) +         (size(𝜎𝑖′) − size(𝜎𝑖 ))
                                                         𝑖
Because 𝑝 is strictly more specific than 𝑝, we know that size(𝑝 ′) ≥ size(𝑝), but all its substitu-
         ′

tions 𝜎𝑖′ must be strictly smaller than 𝜎𝑖 . Hence, with enough uses, 𝑝 ′ is bound to become more
compressive than 𝑝; when there are just a few uses, however, 𝑝 can be more optimal. For example,
consider the corpus ⟨C [𝑓 (1, 2, 3)], C [𝑓 (4, 5, 6)]⟩, where C is some sufficiently large context. Here, a
more general pattern 𝑝 = C [𝑋 ] is more optimal than the more specific 𝑝 ′ = C [𝑓 (𝑋, 𝑌 , 𝑍 )], because
size(𝑝 ′) − size(𝑝) = 3, each use of 𝑝 ′ is only one node cheaper, and there are only two uses.
   Despite the lack of theoretical completeness guarantees, we argue that restricting candidate
patterns to P 2 (𝑡) is a reasonable trade-off. Note, that the counter-examples above are quite contrived,
and they no longer apply once the corpus contains sufficiently many and sufficiently diverse
instances of a pattern (for example, adding 𝑓 (𝑏, 𝑏) to the first corpus would make 𝑓 (𝑋, 𝑌 ) appear in
P 2 (𝑡), and adding just one more occurrence of 𝑝 ′ into the second corpus would make it as optimal
as 𝑝). Our empirical evaluation confirms that this approximation works well in practice.
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                                15


Syntax                                                        Denotation J·K : 𝑁 → 2 T (Σ) , J·K : 𝐶 → 2 T (Σ)
       e-class ids 𝑎, 𝑏                         ∈I
         e-nodes 𝑛 ::= 𝑠 (𝑎 1, . . . , 𝑎𝑘 )     ∈𝑁             J𝑠 (𝑎 1, . . . , 𝑎𝑘 )K   = {𝑠 (𝑡 1, . . . , 𝑡𝑘 ) | 𝑡𝑖 ∈ J𝑀 (𝑎𝑖 )K}
        e-classes 𝑐 ::= {𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛𝑚 }      ∈𝐶
                                                                                          Ð
                                                               J{𝑛 1, . . . , 𝑛𝑚 }K     = 𝑖 ∈ [1,𝑚] J𝑛𝑖 K

Fig. 8. Syntax, metavariables, and denotation for the components of an e-graph. Here 𝑠 ∈ Σ and 𝑘 = arity(𝑠).


4     LIBRARY LEARNING MODULO EQUATIONAL THEORY
E-Graphs. Let I be a denumerable set of e-class ids. An e-graph G is a triple ⟨𝐶, 𝑀, 𝑟 ⟩, where 𝐶 is a
set of e-classes, 𝑀 : I → 𝐶 is an e-class map. and 𝑟 ∈ I is the root class id. An e-class 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 is a set
of e-nodes 𝑛 ∈ 𝑁 , and an e-node is a constructor applied to e-class ids. The syntax of e-classes and
e-nodes is summarized in Fig. 8 (left). An e-graph has to satisfy the congruence invariant, which
states that the e-graph has no two identical e-nodes (or alternatively, that all e-classes are disjoint).5
   The denotation of an e-graph—the set of terms it represents—is the denotation of its root e-class
J𝑀 (𝑟 )K, where the denotation of e-classes and e-nodes is defined mutually-recursively in Fig. 8
(right). Note that the denotation can be infinite if the e-graph has cycles. An e-graph induces an
equivalence relation ≡ G , where 𝑡 1 ≡ G 𝑡 2 iff there exists an e-class 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 such that 𝑡 1 ∈ J𝑐K ∧ 𝑡 2 ∈ J𝑐K.
   E-graphs provide means to extract the cheapest term from an e-class according to some cost
function: extractcost (𝑎) = arg min𝑡 ∈J𝑀 (𝑎) K cost(𝑡). If cost is local, meaning that the cost of a term
can be computed from the costs of its immediate children, extraction can be done efficiently by a
greedy algorithm, which recursively extracts the best term from each e-class.
E-Matching. E-matching is a generalization of pattern matching to e-graphs, where matching
an e-class 𝑐 against a pattern 𝑝 yields a set of e-class substitutions 𝜃 : X → I such that 𝜃 (𝑝) is
a “subgraph” of 𝑐. To formalize this notion, we introduce partial terms 𝜋 ∈ T (Σ, I), which are
terms whose leaves can be e-class ids (or, alternatively, patterns with e-class ids for variables). The
containment relation 𝜋 ≺ 𝑎 for some e-class id 𝑎 is defined as follows:
                     𝑎≺𝑎             𝑠 (𝜋 1, . . . , 𝜋𝑘 ) ≺ 𝑎 iff 𝑠 (𝑎 1, . . . , 𝑎𝑘 ) ∈ 𝑀 (𝑎) ∧ 𝜋𝑖 ≺ 𝑎𝑖
With this definition, a pattern 𝑝 matches an e-class 𝑎, 𝑎 ⊑ 𝑝, if there exists an e-class substitution 𝜃 ,
such that 𝜃 (𝑝) ≺ 𝑎. We denote the set of such substitutions as matches(𝑎, 𝑝).
Rewriting and Equality Saturation. Equality saturation (EqSat) [Tate et al. 2009; Willsey et al.
2021] takes as input a term 𝑡 and a set of equations that induce an equivalence relation ≡, and
produces an e-graph G such that JGK = {𝑡 ′ | 𝑡 ≡ 𝑡 ′ } and 𝑡 ≡ 𝑡 ′ iff 𝑡 ≡ G 𝑡 ′. The core idea of EqSat is
to convert equations into rewrite rules and apply them to the e-graph in a non-destructive way: so
that the original term and the rewritten terms are both represented in the same e-class. Applying a
rewrite rule 𝑝 1 ⇒ 𝑝 2 to an e-class 𝑎 works as follows: for each 𝜃 ∈ matches(𝑎, 𝑝 1 ), we obtain the
rewritten partial term 𝜋 ′ = 𝜃 (𝑝 2 ) and then add this partial term to the same e-class 𝑎, restoring the
congruence invariant (i.e. merging e-classes that now have identical e-nodes).

4.1    Top-Level Algorithm
  We can formalize the problem of library learning modulo equational theory (LLMT) as follows:
given a term 𝑡 and a set of equations that induce an equivalence relation ≡, the goal is to find a
compressed term 𝑡ˆ ∈ T̂ (Σ, X), such that 𝑡ˆ →𝛽 𝑡 ′ ≡ 𝑡 (for some 𝑡 ′), and 𝑡ˆ has a minimal size.
5 In a real e-graph implementation, the definitions of e-graphs and the congruence invariant are more involved, because

efficient merging of e-classes requires introducing a non-trivial equivalence relation over e-class ids; these details are
irrelevant for our purposes. Also, other formalizations of e-graphs do not feature a distinguished root e-class.
16                                            Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


 1    # Original term 𝑡 , set of equational rewrite rules R ≡ , maximum library size 𝑁
 2    def LLMT(𝑡 , 𝑅≡ , 𝑁 ):
 3       # EqSat phase:
 4       G = egraph(𝑡 ) # initialize with a single term 𝑡
 5       G = eqSat(G, R ≡ ) # G represents all terms that are ≡ 𝑡
 6
 7       # candidate generation phase:
 8       P = AU(G ) # generate candidate patterns by anti-unification
 9       R𝜅 = {𝜅 (𝑝) | 𝑝 ∈ P} # construct a compression rule from every pattern
10       G ′ = eqSat(G, R𝜅 ) # G ′ represents all ways to compress G
11
12       # candidate selection phase:
13       R ′ = select_library(G ′, 𝑁 ) # select the best 𝑁 rules from R𝜅 using beam search
14       G ′′ = eqSat(G, 𝑅 ′ ) # G ′′ represents all ways to compress G using the optimal library
15       return extract( G ′′ ) # extract the smallest compressed term from G ′′


                                   Fig. 9. The top-level LLMT algorithm.


    Our top-level algorithm LLMT is depicted in Fig. 9. This algorithm takes as input the original
corpus 𝑡 and the equational theory, represented as a set of require rules R ≡ (another input to the
algorithm is the maximum size of the library; this parameter is introduced for the sake of efficiency,
as we explain in Sec. 5). As the first step (lines 4–5), LLMT applies EqSat to obtain an e-graph G that
represents all terms 𝑡 ′ such that 𝑡 ′ ≡ 𝑡. This reduces the LLMT problem to library learning over
an e-graph: i.e. the goal is to find a minimal-size compressed term 𝑡ˆ, such that 𝑡ˆ →𝛽 𝑡 ′ for some
𝑡 ′ ∈ JGK. Similarly to Sec. 3, we take a pattern-based approach to this problem, that is, we select a
set P of candidate patterns and then perform compression rewrites using these patterns.
    The rest of the algorithm is split into two phases: candidate generation and candidate selection.
Candidate generation (lines 8–10) first computes the set of candidate patterns P using the anti-
unification mechanism extended to e-graphs. Then it creates a compression rule (𝜅-rule, see Sec. 3)
from each candidate pattern, and once again applies EqSat to obtain a new e-graph G ′. This new
e-graph represents all possible ways to compress the terms from G using patterns in P. Finally, the
candidate selection phase (lines 13–15) selects the optimal subset of compression rules R ′, constructs
an e-graph G ′′ that represents all possible compressions using only the selected compression rules,
and finally extracts the smallest compressed term from this e-graph.
    The rest of this section focuses on the candidate generation via e-graph anti-unification (line 8).
The candidate selection functions select_library and extract are discussed in Sec. 5.

4.2    Candidate Generation via E-Graph Anti-Unification
The goal of candidate generation is to find a set of patterns that are useful for compression. Following
the discussion in Sec. 3, we restrict our attention to patterns AU(𝑡 1, 𝑡 2 ), where 𝑡 1 and 𝑡 2 are subterms
of some 𝑡 ∈ JGK. The naïve approach is to enumerate all such 𝑡, and for each one, perform anti-
unification on all pairs of subterms; this is suboptimal at best, and impossible at worst (when JGK is
infinite). Hence in this section we show how to compute a finite set of candidate patterns directly
on the e-graph, without discarding any optimal patterns.
E-Class Anti-Unification. Let us first consider anti-unification of two e-classes, AU(𝑎, 𝑏), which
takes as input e-class ids 𝑎 and 𝑏 and returns a set of patterns. We define AU(𝑎, 𝑏) = AU(𝜖 ⊢ 𝑎, 𝑏),
where AU(Γ ⊢ 𝑎, 𝑏) is an auxiliary function that additionally takes into account a context Γ. A
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                          17


                                    E-node Anti-Unification AU(Γ ⊢ 𝑛 1, 𝑛 2 )
         AU(Γ, (𝑎, 𝑏) ⊢ 𝑠 (𝑎 1, . . . , 𝑎𝑘 ), 𝑠 (𝑏 1, . . . , 𝑏𝑘 ))   = {𝑠 (𝑝 1, . . . , 𝑝𝑘 ) | 𝑝𝑖 ∈ AU(Γ ⊢ 𝑎𝑖 , 𝑏𝑖 )}
                     AU(Γ, (𝑎, 𝑏) ⊢ 𝑠 1 (. . .), 𝑠 2 (. . .))         = {𝑋𝑎,𝑏 } if 𝑠 1 ≠ 𝑠 2
                                      E-class Anti-Unification AU(Γ ⊢ 𝑎, 𝑏)
                  AU(Γ ⊢ 𝑎, 𝑏)                       ∈Γ
                                       = ∅ if (𝑎, 𝑏) Ð                                         
                  AU(Γ ⊢ 𝑎, 𝑏)         = dominant 𝑛𝑎 ∈𝑀 (𝑎),𝑛𝑏 ∈𝑀 (𝑏) AU(Γ, (𝑎, 𝑏) ⊢ 𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑏 )

  Fig. 10. E-class anti-unification defined as two mutually-recursive functions of e-nodes and e-class ids.


context is a list of pairs of e-classes that have been visited while computing the AU, and is required
to prevent infinite recursion in case of cycles in the e-graph.
    Fig. 10 defines this operation using two mutually recursive functions that anti-unify e-classes
and e-nodes. Note that e-node AU is always invoked in a non-empty context. The first equation
anti-unifies two e-nodes with the same constructor: in this case, we recursively anti-unify their
child e-classes and return the cross-product of the results. The second equation applies to e-nodes
with different constructors: as in term AU, this results in a pattern variable. A nice side-effect of
dealing with e-graphs is that we need not keep track of the anti-substitution to guarantee that each
pair of subterms maps to the same variable: because any duplicate terms are represented by the
same e-class, we can simply use the e-class ids 𝑎 and 𝑏 in the name of the pattern variable 𝑋𝑎,𝑏 .
    The second block of equations defines anti-unification of e-classes (let us first ignore the dominant
which will be explained shortly). The first equation applies when 𝑎 and 𝑏 have already been visited:
in this case, we break the cycle and return the empty set. Otherwise, the last equation anti-unifies
all pairs of e-nodes from the two e-classes in an updated context and merges the results. Note that
this will add a pattern variable unless all e-nodes in both e-classes have the same constructor; we
have omitted this detail in Sec. 2 for simplicity, but this is implemented in babble and often yields
more optimal patterns. For example, consider anti-unifying 𝑐 1 and 𝑐 2 from Fig. 4 (right): although
they have the constructor scale in common, 𝑋 is actually a better pattern for abstracting these
two e-classes than scale 𝑋 𝑌 , because the total size of the actual arguments to pattern 𝑋 (side (6)
and scale ( repRot ( side (8), 8, 2𝜋/8), 2)) is the same as those to the pattern scale 𝑋 𝑌 (side (6), 1,
repRot ( side (8), 8, 2𝜋/8), and 2), and the pattern 𝑋 itself is smaller. This happens because the class
𝑐 1 represents several different terms, and the term “compatible with” 𝑋 in this case is smaller than
the term “compatible wit” scale 𝑋 𝑌 .
Dominant Patterns. Recall that AU(𝑎, 𝑏) produces patterns with variable names 𝑋𝑎𝑖 ,𝑏𝑖 , which
record the e-class ids they abstract; let us refer to such a pattern 𝑝 as uniquely matched and
define 𝜃𝑙 (𝑝) = {𝑋𝑎𝑖 ,𝑏𝑖 ↦→ 𝑎𝑖 } and 𝜃 𝑟 (𝑝) = {𝑋𝑎𝑖 ,𝑏𝑖 ↦→ 𝑏𝑖 }; these substitutions are necessarily among
matches(𝑎, 𝑝) and matches(𝑏, 𝑝), respectively. Given two uniquely matched patterns 𝑝 1, 𝑝 2 ∈
AU(𝑎, 𝑏), we say that 𝑝 1 dominates 𝑝 2 in the context of (𝑎, 𝑏) if (1) vars(𝑝 1 ) ⊆ vars(𝑝 2 ), and (2)
size(𝑝 1 ) ≤ size(𝑝 2 ). We can show that if 𝑝 1 dominates 𝑝 2 , then we can safely discard 𝑝 2 from the
set of candidate patterns. First, since 𝑝 1 is no larger than 𝑝 2 , the definition of its 𝜆-abstraction is also
no larger. Second, given a term 𝑡𝑎 ∈ J𝑎K, compressing this term using 𝑝 1 vs 𝑝 2 , requires choosing
actual arguments from range(𝜃𝑙 (𝑝 1 )) vs range(𝜃𝑙 (𝑝 2 )); because the former is a subset of the latter,
the first application can always be made no larger (symmetric argument applies for 𝑡𝑏 ∈ J𝑏K).
    Hence it is sufficient that AU(𝑎, 𝑏) only returns the set of dominant patterns (i.e. a pattern
dominated by any pattern in the set can be discarded). This is what the function dominant does
in the last equation of Fig. 10. This pruning technique is especially helpful in the presence of
equational theories. Suppose our theory contains the equation 𝑋 + 𝑌 ≡ 𝑌 + 𝑋 , and that the original
18                                          Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


term 𝑡 contains subterms 1 + 2 and 3 + 1. After saturation, the e-graph will represent 1 + 2 and 2 + 1
in some e-class 𝑎 and 3 + 1 and 1 + 3 in another e-class 𝑏; AU(𝑎, 𝑏) will then produce both patterns
𝑋 + 1 and 1 + 𝑋 , but it is clearly redundant to have both, since they match the same e-classes with
the same substitutions 𝜃 . Pruning of dominated patterns will eliminate one of them.
Avoiding Cycles. Interestingly enough, the same notion of dominant patterns justifies why we
need not follow cycles in the e-graph when computing AU(𝑎, 𝑏), or, alternatively, why a finite set
of candidate patterns is sufficient to compress any term in JGK, even if this set is infinite. Removing
the first equation that short-circuits cycles can only lead to solutions 𝑝 ′ of the form
                                           𝑝 ′ = [𝑋 ↦→ 𝑝] (𝑞)
where 𝑝 ∈ AU(𝑎, 𝑏) is another solution, and 𝑞 is some context, added by the cycle. It is clear that
any such 𝑝 ′ is dominated by 𝑝, and hence can be discarded.
E-Graph Anti-Unification. The algorithm AU(𝑎, 𝑏) computes a set of patterns that can be used
to compress terms represented by the e-classes 𝑎 and 𝑏. Our ultimate goal, however, is to compute
candidate patterns for abstracting all subterms of some 𝑡 ∈ JGK. The most straightforward way to
achieve this is to apply AU(𝑎, 𝑏) to all pairs of e-classes in G. We can do better, however: some
pairs of e-classes need not be considered, because they cannot occur together in a single term 𝑡.
For an example, consider the following e-graph, with I = N and 𝑟 = 0:
                      0 ↦→ {𝑓 (1), 𝑔(2)}   1 ↦→ {𝑔(3)}      2 ↦→ {𝑓 (3)}      3 ↦→ {𝑎}
This e-graph can result, for example, by rewriting a term 𝑓 (𝑔(𝑎)) using an equation 𝑓 (𝑔(𝑋 )) ≡
𝑔(𝑓 (𝑋 )). In this e-graph, the e-classes 1 and 2 (representing 𝑔(𝑎) and 𝑓 (𝑎), respectively) clearly
cannot co-occur in the same term: since the e-graph only represents two terms, 𝑓 (𝑔(𝑎)) and 𝑔(𝑓 (𝑎)).
    To formalize this intuition, we define the co-occurrence relation between two e-class ids as
follows. An e-class 𝑎 is a sibling of 𝑏 if there is an e-node that has both 𝑎 and 𝑏 as children. An
e-class 𝑎 is an ancestor of 𝑏 if 𝑎 = 𝑏 or 𝑏 is a child of some e-node 𝑛 ∈ 𝑀 (𝑐) and 𝑎 is an ancestor of
𝑐; 𝑎 is a proper ancestor of 𝑏 if 𝑎 is an ancestor of 𝑏 and 𝑎 ≠ 𝑏. Two e-classes 𝑎 and 𝑏 are co-occurring
if (1) one of them is a proper ancestor of another, or (2) they have ancestors that are siblings.
    Finally, to compute the set AU(G) of all candidate patterns for an e-graph G, LLMT first computes
the co-occurrence relation between all e-classes in G, and then computes AU(𝑎, 𝑏) of all pairs of
e-classes that are co-occurring. As mentioned in Sec. 2, we use a dynamic programming algorithm
that memoizes the results of AU(𝑎, 𝑏) to avoid recomputation.

5    CANDIDATE SELECTION VIA E-GRAPH EXTRACTION
After generating candidate abstractions, the LLMT algorithm invokes select_library to pick the subset
of candidate patterns that can best be used to compress the input corpus. This section describes
our approach to selecting the optimal library dubbed targeted common subexpression elimination.
Library Selection as E-Graph Extraction. Recall that candidate selection starts with an e-graph
G ′, which represents all the ways of compressing the initial corpus and its equivalent terms using
the candidate patterns P. We will refer to a subset L ⊂ P as a library. The optimal size of an e-class
𝑐 compressed with L can be computed as the sum of the sizes of (1) the smallest term 𝑡 ∈ J𝑐K using
only the library functions in L and where 𝜆-abstractions do not count toward the size of 𝑡, and
(2) the smallest version of each 𝑝 ∈ L. Note that the cost of defining an abstraction in L is only
counted once, and that abstractions in L can be used to compress other abstractions in L. Our goal
is to find L such that the root e-class compressed with L has the smallest size.
   Given a particular library, we can find the size of the smallest term via a relatively straight-
forward top-down traversal of the e-graph. Hence, a naïve approach to library selection would
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                               19


                                         E-node cost set costset𝑁 (𝑛)
                                costset𝑁 (𝑠 ())     = {(∅, 1)}
                              costset𝑁 (𝑠 (𝑎𝑖 ))    = {(L, 𝑢 + 1) | (L, 𝑢) ∈ cross(𝑎𝑖 )}
                        costset𝑁 ((𝜆𝑋  𝑎) 𝑏)       = addlib(𝑎, costset(𝑎), costset(𝑏))
                                          E-class cost set costset(𝑎)
                                                               Ð
                             costset({𝑛 𝑗 }) = prune(reduce( costset𝑁 (𝑛 𝑗 )))
                             Auxiliary definitions cross, addlib, reduce, prune
         cross(𝑧 1, 𝑧 2 )    = prune(reduce({(L1 ∪ L2, 𝑢 1 + 𝑢 2 ) | (L1, 𝑢 1 ) ∈ 𝑧 1, (L2, 𝑢 2 ) ∈ 𝑧 2 }))
      addlib(𝑎, 𝑧 1, 𝑧 2 )   = prune(reduce({(L1 ∪ L2 ∪ {𝑎}, 𝑢 2 ) | (L1, 𝑢 1 ) ∈ 𝑧 1, (L2, 𝑢 2 ) ∈ 𝑧 2 }))
           reduce(𝑧)         = {(L1, 𝑢 1 ) ∈ 𝑧 | ∀(L2, 𝑢 2 ) ∈ 𝑧 \ (L1, 𝑢 1 ). L1 ⊂ L2 ∨ 𝑢 1 < 𝑢 2 }
       prune(𝑁 , 𝐾, 𝑧)       = top_k({(L, 𝑢) ∈ 𝑧 | |L| ≤ 𝑁 }, 𝐾)

Fig. 11. Cost set propagation, defined as two mutually recursive functions. Blue text corresponds to the
partial order reduction optimization and red text corresponds to the beam approximation. top_k(𝑆, 𝐾) is a
helper function that returns top 𝐾 elements from the sorted set 𝑆.



be to enumerate all subsets of P and pick the one that produces the smallest term at the root.
Unfortunately, this approach becomes intractable as the size of P grows.
Exploiting Partial Shared Structure. Instead, babble selects the optimal library using a bottom-
up dynamic programming algorithm. To this end, it associates each e-node and e-class with a cost
set, which is a set of pairs (L, 𝑢) where L is a library and 𝑢 is the use cost of this library, i.e. the
size of the smallest term represented by the e-node / e-class if it is allowed to use L (excluding
the size of L itself). Cost sets are propagated up the e-graph using the rules shown in Fig. 11. The
base case is a nullary e-node 𝑠 (), which cannot use any library functions and whose size is always
1. For an e-node that has children, babble computes the cross product over the cost sets of all its
child e-classes. Finally, for an application e-node (𝜆𝑋  𝑎) 𝑏, the cost set must include the library
function 𝑎 (in addition to some combination of libraries from the cost sets of 𝑎 and 𝑏); note that
the use cost of the abstraction node only includes the use cost of 𝑏, since abstraction bodies are
excluded from the use cost.
   To compute the cost set of an e-class, babble takes the union of the cost sets of all its e-nodes.
However, doing this naively would result in the size of the cost set growing exponentially. To
mitigate this, we define a partial order reduction (reduce), which only prunes provably sub-optimal
cost sets. Given two pairs (L1, 𝑢 1 ) and (L2, 𝑢 2 ) in the cost set of an e-class, if L1 ⊂ L2 and 𝑢 1 ≤ 𝑢 2 ,
then L2 is subsumed by L1 and can be removed from the cost set, intuitively because L1 can
compress this e-class even better and with fewer library functions. In practice this optimization
prunes libraries with redundant abstraction, where two different abstractions can be used to
compress the same subterms.
Beam Approximation. Even with the partial order reduction, calculating the cost set for every
e-node and e-class can blow up exponentially. To mitigate this, babble provides the option to limit
both the size of each library inside a cost set and the size of the cost set stored for each e-class. This
results in a beam-search style algorithm, where the cost set of each e-class is pruneed, as shown in
Fig. 11. This pruning operation first filters out libraries that have more than 𝑁 patterns, then ranks
the rest by the total cost (i.e. the sum of use cost and the size of the library), and finally returns the
top 𝐾 libraries from that set.
20                                          Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


          DreamCoder [Ellis et al. 2021]                       2d cad [Wong et al. 2022]
        Domain # Benchmarks # Eqs                        Domain        # Benchmarks # Eqs
        List                   59       14               Nuts & Bolts                1    7
        Physics                18        8               Vehicles                    1    9
        Text                   66        -               Gadgets                     1   17
        Logo                   12        -               Furniture                   1    9
        Towers                 18        -
Table 1. We selected our benchmark domains from two previous works: DreamCoder [Ellis et al. 2021] and
2d cad [Wong et al. 2022]. Each domain from DreamCoder has multiple benchmarks; 2d cad has one large
benchmark per domain. For some domains, we additionally supplied babble with an equational theory; we
report the number of equations in the final column.




6     EVALUATION
We evaluated babble and the LLMT algorithm behind it with two quantitative research questions
and a third qualitative one:
RQ 1. Can babble compress programs better than a state-of-the-art library learning tool?
RQ 2. Are the main techniques in LLMT (anti-unification and equational theories) important to the
      algorithm’s performance?
RQ 3. Do the functions babble learns make intuitive sense?

Benchmark Selection. We use two suites of benchmarks to evaluate babble, both shown in Tab. 1.
The first suite originates from the DreamCoder work [Ellis et al. 2021], and is available as a
public repository [Bowers 2022]. DreamCoder is the current state-of-the-art library learning tool,
and using these benchmarks allows us to perform a head-to-head comparison. The DreamCoder
benchmarks are split into five domains (each with a different DSL); we selected two of the domains—
List and Physics—which we understood best, to add an equational theory.
   The second benchmark suite, called 2d cad, comes from Wong et al. [2022]. This work collects a
large suite of programs in a graphics DSL for the purpose of studying connections between the gen-
erated objects and their natural language descriptions. There are 1,000 programs in the “Drawings”
portion of this dataset, divided into four subdomains (listed in Tab. 1) of 250 programs each.
   We ran babble on all benchmarks on an AMD EPYC 7702P processor at 2.0 GHz. Each benchmark
was run on a single core. The DreamCoder results were taken from the benchmark repository [Bow-
ers 2022]; DreamCoder was run on 8 cores of an AMD EPYC 7302 processor at 3.0 GHz.

6.1    Comparison with DreamCoder
To answer RQ 1, we compare to the state-of-the-art DreamCoder tool [Ellis et al. 2021] on its
own benchmarks. The DreamCoder benchmarks are suited to its workflow; while the input to
a library learning task is conceptually a set of programs (or just one big program), each input to
DreamCoder is a set of groups of programs. Each group is a set of programs that are all output
from the same program synthesis task (from an earlier part of the DreamCoder pipeline). When
compressing a program via library learning, DreamCoder is minimizing the cost of the program
made by concatenating the most compressed program from each group together, in other words:
                                      ∑︁
                                               min     cost(𝑝)
                                                program 𝑝 ∈ 𝑔
                                      group 𝑔
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                                                                                                       21

                  103
                                                                                  Babble                                                                                                 Babble
                                                                                                                          103
                                                                                  DreamCoder                                                                                             DreamCoder
                                                                                  BabbleSyn                                                                                              BabbleSyn
                  102                                                             EqSat                                                                                                  EqSat
                                                                                                                          102




Time (seconds)                                                                                          Time (seconds)
                  101
                                                                                                                          101



                  100
                                                                                                                          100



                 10−1                                                                                                    10−1



                 10−2                                                                                                    10−2
                        1.0   1.1        1.2          1.3                         1.4                                           1.0      1.2         1.4      1.6    1.8     2.0   2.2      2.4    2.6
                                      Compression Ratio                                                                                                      Compression Ratio



                              (a) List domain                                                                                                  (b) Physics domain
                 103                                                              Babble                                              Babble
                                                                                  DreamCoder                                          DreamCoder




                 102                                                                                                     103




Time (seconds)                                                                                          Time (seconds)
                 101
                                                                                                                         102




                 100
                                                                                                                         101



                        1.0     1.1            1.2                          1.3            1.4                                         1.1                 1.2         1.3         1.4            1.5
                                      Compression Ratio                                                                                                      Compression Ratio


                              (c) Text domain                                                                                                    (d) Logo domain

                                                                103




                                                                102




                                               Time (seconds)   101




                                                                100

                                                                                                                                          Babble
                                                                                                                                          DreamCoder

                                                                      1.0            1.2          1.4            1.6                           1.8
                                                                                               Compression Ratio


                                                                                        (e) Towers domain

Fig. 12. babble consistently achieves better compression ratios than DreamCoder on benchmarks from the
DreamCoder domains, and it does so 1–2 orders of magnitude faster. Each marker shows the compression
ratio (x-axis) and run time (y-axis) of a benchmark. Each benchmark is one DreamCoder input, i.e., a set of
groups of programs as described above. Lower and to the right is better. In the domains where we supplied
babble with an equational theory (List and Physics), additional markers show the performance of babble
using purely syntactic learning (without equations, “BabbleSyn”) or only equality saturation without library
learning (“EqSat”).
22                                             Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


                                                Without Eqs                              With Eqs
 Benchmark            Input Size          Out Size CR Time (s)                  Out Size    CR Time (s)
 Nuts & Bolts             19009               2059 9.23      18.74                  1744 10.90     40.75
 Vehicles                 35427               6477 5.47      79.50                  5505 6.44      78.03
 Gadgets                  35713               6798 5.25      75.07                  5037 7.09      82.29
 Furniture                42936             10539 4.07      133.25                  9417 4.56     110.00
 Nuts & Bolts (clean)     18259               2215 8.24      18.12                  1744 10.47     40.91

Table 2. Results for running babble on the four large examples from the 2d cad dataset [Wong et al. 2022], both
without and with an equational theory. Each row includes the input and output AST sizes, the compression
ratio (CR), and babble’s run time in seconds. Fig. 13 plots this data. The final row shows performance on a
modified dataset.



DreamCoder takes this approach to give its library learning component many variants of the same
program, in order to introduce more shared structure between solution programs across different
synthesis problems.
   To implement DreamCoder’s benchmarks in babble, we use the e-graph to capture the notion
of program variants in a group. Since every program in a group is the output of the same synthesis
task, babble considers them equivalent and places them in the same e-class.
Results. We ran babble on five domains from the DreamCoder benchmark suite. The results
are shown in Fig. 12. In summary, babble consistently achieves better compression ratios than
DreamCoder on benchmarks from the DreamCoder domains, and it does so 1–2 orders of
magnitude faster.
The Role of Equational Theory. To answer RQ 2, we again turn to the DreamCoder benchmarks,
focusing on the domains where we supplied babble with an equational theory: List and Physics. In
these domains, we ran babble in two additional configurations:
    • “BabbleSyn” ignores the equational theory, just doing syntactic library learning.
    • “EqSat” just optimizes the program using Equality Saturation with the rewrites from the
       equational theory. This configuration does not do any library learning.
Fig. 12a and 12b show the results for these additional configurations, as well as DreamCoder
and the normal babble configuration. All babble configurations rely on targeted subexpression
elimination to select the final learned library. The “EqSat” configuration is unsurprisingly very
fast but performs relatively little compression, as it does not learn any library abstractions. The
“BabbleSyn” configuration does indeed compress the inputs, in fact it is still better than DreamCoder
in both domains. However, the addition of the equational theory (the “babble” markers in the
plots) significantly improves compression and adds relatively little run time, well within an order
of magnitude.

6.2   Large-Scale 2d cad Benchmarks
The previous section demonstrated that babble’s performance far surpasses the state of the art. In
this section, we present and discuss the results of running babble on benchmarks from the 2d cad
domain. These benchmarks, taken from Wong et al. [2022], are significantly larger (roughly 10x -
100x) than those from the DreamCoder dataset and out of reach for DreamCoder.
Quantitative Results. Tab. 2 and Fig. 13 show the results of running babble on the benchmarks
from the 2d cad domain. The plot in Fig. 13 makes two observations clear. First and relevant for
RQ 2, the addition of an equational theory improved all four benchmarks (the solid marker is
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                          23


                                                                                          Nuts & Bolts
                                                                                          Vehicles
                                                120                                       Gadgets
                                                                                          Furniture

                                                100




                               Time (seconds)
                                                80



                                                60



                                                40



                                                20

                                                      0   2   4             6         8       10
                                                                  Compression Ratio




Fig. 13. Data from Tab. 2 in scatter plot. Each line segment shows compression ratio and run time for a
domain without (hollow marker) and with (solid marker) an equational theory. Using an equational theory
improves compression in all cases, and even improves run time in two cases.



always to the right of the hollow marker). Second, and perhaps surprisingly, equational theories
can sometimes make babble faster! This is consistent with previous observations about equality
saturation [Willsey et al. 2021]: while equality saturation typically makes an e-graph larger, it can
sometimes combine two relevant e-classes into one and reduce the amount of work that some
operation over an e-graph must do.
   We also observed that the Nuts-and-bolts dataset contains several redundant transformations,
like the “scale by 1” featured in the running example of Sec. 2. These redundancies can be useful for
finding abstractions in the absence of an equational theory. However, they should not be required
in babble since LLMT can introduce the redundancies wherever required. We therefore removed
all existing redundant transformations from Nuts-and-bolts and ran babble on the transformed
dataset. The results are in the final row of Tab. 2. On the modified dataset, babble achieves identical
compression when using the equational theory, but without the equations it performs worse than
on the unmodified dataset.
Qualitative Evaluation. Fig. 14 highlights a sample of abstractions that babble discovered from
the 2d cad benchmarks. We ran babble on each of the benchmarks and applied the learned
abstractions on a few input programs to visualize their usage. Questions about usability and
readability of learned libraries are difficult to answer without rigorous user studies which we leave
for future work. Nevertheless, Fig. 14 shows that babble identifies common structures that are
similar across different benchmarks, which makes its output easier to reuse and interpret.
  First, we revisit the Nuts-and-bolts example from Sec. 1: Fig. 14 shows that babble learns the
scaled polygon (ngon) abstraction which is applicable to several programs in the dataset. We also
see that babble consistently finds a similar abstraction representing a “ring of shapes” for both
Nuts-and-bolts and Vehicles. Finally, as the Gadgets example shows, babble finds abstractions for
both the entire model as well as its components. In this case, it learned the function gadget_body that
abstracts the entire outer shape, and it also learned dial that abstracts the handles of the outer shape.

7   RELATED WORK
babble is inspired by work on library learning, specifically the DreamCoder line of work, as well
as equality saturation-based program synthesis and decompilation.
24                                                                Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


     nuts & bolts
                                         ngon = λsize sides
                                           T (repeat (T l (M 1 0 -0.5 (0.5 / tan (π / sides)))) sides
                                                     (M 1 ((2 * π) / sides) 0 0))
                                             (M size 0 0 0)                                   scaled n-gon ngon 4 8                         ngon 1 6


                                         con_hex = λinner_size                       ring = λn shape
                                           C (ngon 4 6) (ngon inner_size 6)            repeat (offset 1.5 shape) n (rotate n)




                                          con_hex 4.25     con_hex 2    con_hex 1
                                                                                        ring 6 s      ring 6 s
                                                concentric scaled hexagons                                             ring of shapes

  vehicles
                                          oneseg_body = λrest                                                    circle_ring = λn    repeat
                                            C (C (C (C (T (T (r_s 0 0) (xform_x 0)) (xform_x -8))                 (T (T c (M 0.25 0 0 0))
                                                    (T (T (r_s 16 4.5) (M 1 0 0 2.25))                               (M 1 0 0.53033 0.53033))
                                                       (xform_x 0)))                                              n
                                                 (T (T (r_s 0 0) (xform_x 0)) (xform_x 8)))                       (M 1 ((2 * π) / x0) 0 0)
                                              (T (r_s 12 1) (M 1 0 0 5))) rest



                                                                                                                      circle_ring 4    circle_ring 8
                                                         oneseg_body <antenna>      oneseg_body <wheels>

                                                                             one-segment vehicle body                                 ring of circles

     furniture

                                         shelf = λhandle
                                           C (T (move_y -3 (C (move_y 0 (r_s 15 3))
                                                              (T (repeat (T (T handle (M 0.84375 0 0 0)) (xform_x 0))
                                                                         2
                                                                         (xform_x 6.375))
                                                              (xform_x -3.1875))))
                                                           (M 1 0 0 0.75))                       shelf c              shelf s
                                             (move_y -2.25 (r_s 16.5 4.5))
                                                                                                                                               shelf


     gadgets                             dial = λhandle                                     gadget_body = λheight top
                                           C (C (T c (xform_x 0)) (T handle (M 1.5 0 0 0)))   C (C top (T (r_s 1 height) (xform_x 7.75)))
                                             (T (T (T l (xform_x -0.5)) (M 1 (π / 2) 0 0))
                                                                                                (T (r_s 1 height)
                                                (M 1 0 (1 * (0.5 * cos (π / 2))) 0.5))
                                                                                                       (l31 (0 - 0.5 * (arith 0 + 2 * 0.5))))




                                                                        dial c      dial s
                                                                                                   gadget_body        gadget_body
                                                                                                   2.25 <rect>         2.25 empt
                                                                                       dial                                            gadget body


                 input corpus            learned library


Fig. 14. A selection of evaluated programs from each of the domains in the 2d cad dataset, along with
a selection of functions that babble learns within the first ten rounds for each domain. Bolded functions
represent learned abstractions. Note this figure uses the concrete syntax from the 2d cad dataset; it is similar
to the simplified form shown in the overview. We named the learned functions and their parameters for
                 ->   ->
                       ->   ->
                            -> ->   ->




clarity.
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                    25


DreamCoder. DreamCoder [Ellis et al. 2021] is a program synthesizer that learns a library
of abstractions from solutions to a set of related synthesis tasks. The library is intended to be
used for solving other similar synthesis tasks. DreamCoder uses version spaces [Lau et al. 2001;
Mitchell 1977] to compactly store a large set of programs and leverages ideas from e-graphs (such
as e-matching) but only for exploring the space of refactorings of the original program using the
candidate libraries, not for making library learning robust to syntactic variation. Our evaluation
shows that babble can find more optimal abstractions faster than DreamCoder.
   DreamCoder has sparked several direction of follow-up work that attempt to improve the
efficiency of its library learning procedure and the quality of the learned abstractions. One of them
is by Wong et al. [2021], which uses natural language annotations and a neural network to guide
library learning. Another one is Stitch [Bowers et al. 2023], which was developed concurrently
with this work and is the most closely related to babble; we discuss Stitch in some detail below.
Stitch. The core difference between the two approaches is that Stitch focuses on improving
efficiency of purely syntactic library learning, whereas babble attempts to improve its expressiveness
by adding equational theories. While babble separates library learning into two phases—candidate
generation via anti-unification and candidate selection via e-graph extraction—the Stitch algo-
rithm interleaves the generation and selection phases in a branch-and-bound top-down search.
Starting from the “top” pattern 𝑋 , Stitch gradually refines it until further refinement does not
pay off. To quickly prune suboptimal candidate patterns, Stitch computes an upper bound on
their compression by summing up the compression at each match of this pattern in the corpus
(this bound is imprecise because it does not take into account that matches might overlap). For
candidates that are not pruned this way, Stitch computes their true compression by searching
for the optimal subset of matches to rewrite, a so-called “rewrite strategy”. babble’s extraction
algorithm can be seen as a generalization of Stitch’s rewrite strategy: while the former searches
over both subsets of patterns and how to apply them to the corpus at the same time, the latter
considers a single pattern at a time and only searches for the best way to apply it. Since the search
space in the former case is much larger, babble uses a beam search approximation, while in Stitch
the rewrite strategy is precise. To sum up, the main pros and cons of the two approaches are:
     • babble can learn libraries modulo equational theories, while Stitch cannot;
     • Stitch provides optimality guarantees for learning a single best abstraction at a time, while
       babble can learn multiple abstractions at once, but sacrifices theoretical optimality.
Other Library Learning Techniques. Knorf [Dumancic et al. 2021] is a library learning tool for
logic programs, which, like babble, proceeds in two phases. Their candidate generation phase is
similar to the upper bound computation in Stitch, while their selection phase uses an off-the-shelf
constraint solver. It would be interesting to explore whether their constraint-based technique can
be generalized beyond logic programs.
   Other work develops limited forms of library learning, where only certain kinds of sub-terms
can be abstracted. For example, ShapeMod [Jones et al. 2021] learns macros for 3D shapes repre-
sented in a DSL called ShapeAssembly, and only supports abstracting over numeric parameters,
like dimensions of shapes. Our own prior work [Wang et al. 2021] extracts common structure
from graphical programs, but only supports abstracting over primitive shapes and applying the
abstraction at the top level of the program. Such restrictions make the library learning problem
more computationally tractable, but limit the expressiveness of the learned abstractions.
   There are several neural program synthesis tools [Dechter et al. 2013; Iyer et al. 2019; Lázaro-
Gredilla et al. 2018; Shin et al. 2019] that learn programming idioms using statistical techniques.
Some of these tools have used “explore-compress” algorithms [Dechter et al. 2013] to iteratively
enumerate a set of programs from a grammar and find a solution that exposes abstractions that make
26                                        Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


the set of programs maximally compressible. This is similar to common subexpression elimination
which babble uses for guiding extraction.
Loop rerolling. Loop rerolling is related to library learning in that it also aims to discover hidden
structure in a program, except that this structure is in the form of loops. A variety of domains have
used loop rerolling to infer abstractions from flat input programs. In hardware, loop rerolling is
used to optimize programs for code size [Rocha et al. 2022; Stiff and Vahid 2005; Su et al. 1984]. In
many of these tools, the compiler first unrolls a loop, applies optimizations, then rerolls it — the
compiler therefore has structural information about the loop that can be used for rerolling [Rocha
et al. 2022]. The graphics domain has used loop-rerolling to discover latent structure from low-
level representations. CSGNet [Sharma et al. 2017] and Shape2Prog [Tian et al. 2019] used neural
program generators to discover for loops from pixel- and voxel-based input representations. [Ellis
et al. 2017] used program synthesis and machine learning to infer loops from hand-drawn images.
Szalinski [Nandi et al. 2020] used equality saturation to automatically learn loops in the form of
maps and folds from flat 3D CAD programs that are synthesized by mesh decompilation tools [Nandi
et al. 2018]. WebRobot [Dong et al. 2022] has used speculative rewriting for inferring loops from
traces of web interactions. Similar to babble (and unlike Szalinski), WebRobot finds abstractions
over multiple input traces.
Applications of Anti-Unification. Anti-unification is a well-established technique for discovering
common structure in programs. It is the core idea behind bottom-up Inductive Logic Program-
ming [Cropper and Dumancic 2022], and has also been used for software clone detection [Bulychev
et al. 2010], programming by example [Raza et al. 2014], and learning repetitive code edits [Meng
et al. 2013; Rolim et al. 2017]. It is possible that these applications could also benefit from bab-
ble’s notion of anti-unification over e-graphs to make them more robust to semantics-preserving
transformations.
Synthesis and Optimization using E-graphs. While traditionally e-graphs have been used
in SMT solvers for facilatiting communication between different theories, several tools have
demonstrated their use for optimization and synthesis. Tate et al. [2009] first used e-graphs for
equality saturation: a rewrite-driven technique for optimizing Java programs with loops. Since
then, several tools have used equality saturation for finding programs equivalent to, but better
than, some input program [Nandi et al. 2020; Panchekha et al. 2015; VanHattum et al. 2021; Wang
et al. 2020; Willsey et al. 2021; Wu et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2021]. babble uses an anti-unification
algorithm on e-graphs (together with domain specific rewrites), which prior work has not shown.
Additionally, prior work has either used greedy or ILP-based extraction strategies, whereas babble
uses a new targeted common subexpression elimination approach which we believe can be used in
many other applications of equality saturation, especially given its amenability to approximation
via beam search.

8    CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We presented library learning modulo theory (LLMT), a technique for learning abstractions from a
corpus of programs modulo a user-provided equational theory. We implemented LLMT in babble.
Our evaluation showed that babble achieves better compression orders of magnitude faster than
the state of the art. On a larger benchmark suite of 2d cad programs, babble learns sensible
functions that compress a dataset that was—until now—too large for library learning techniques.
  LLMT and babble present many avenues for future work. First, our evaluation showed that
equational theories are important for achieving high compression, but these must be provided
by domain experts. Recent work in automated theory synthesis like Ruler [Nandi et al. 2021] or
TheSy [Singher and Itzhaky 2021] could aid the user in this task. Second, LLMT uses e-graph
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                          27


anti-unification to generate promising abstraction candidates, but this approach is incomplete and
misses some patterns that could achieve better compression. An exciting direction for future work
is to combine LLMT with more efficient top-down search from Stitch [Bowers et al. 2023]. This is
challenging because Stitch crucially relies on the ability to quickly compute an upper bound on
the compression of a given pattern by summing up the local compression at each of its matches in
the corpus. This upper bound does not straightforwardly extend to e-graphs because in an e-graph
different matches of a pattern may come from different syntactic variants of the corpus, and one
needs to trade-off the compression from abstractions against the size difference between different
syntactic variants.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. We would like to thank
Matthew Bowers for many helpful discussions and especially for publishing the DreamCoder
compression benchmark: we know it was a lot of work to assemble! This work has been supported
by the National Science Foundation under Grants No. 1911149 and 1943623.

REFERENCES
Matt Bowers. 2022. DreamCoder Compression Benchmark. https://github.com/mlb2251/compression_benchmark
Matthew Bowers, Theo X. Olausson, Catherine Wong, Gabriel Grand, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Kevin Ellis, and Armando
   Solar-Lezama. 2023. Top-Down Synthesis For Library Learning. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 7,
   POPL (2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3571234
Peter E. Bulychev, Egor V. Kostylev, and Vladimir A. Zakharov. 2010. Anti-unification Algorithms and Their Applications in
   Program Analysis. In Perspectives of Systems Informatics, Amir Pnueli, Irina Virbitskaite, and Andrei Voronkov (Eds.).
   Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 413–423.
Andrew Cropper and Sebastijan Dumancic. 2022. Inductive Logic Programming At 30: A New Introduction. J. Artif. Intell.
   Res. 74 (2022), 765–850. https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.1.13507
Eyal Dechter, Jon Malmaud, Ryan P. Adams, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2013. Bootstrap Learning via Modular Concept
   Discovery. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Beijing, China)
   (IJCAI ’13). AAAI Press, 1302–1309.
Rui Dong, Zhicheng Huang, Ian Iong Lam, Yan Chen, and Xinyu Wang. 2022. WebRobot: Web Robotic Process Automation
   Using Interactive Programming-by-Demonstration. In Proceedings of the 43rd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference
   on Programming Language Design and Implementation (San Diego, CA, USA) (PLDI 2022). Association for Computing
   Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 152–167. https://doi.org/10.1145/3519939.3523711
Sebastijan Dumancic, Tias Guns, and Andrew Cropper. 2021. Knowledge Refactoring for Inductive Program Synthesis. In
   Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of
   Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021,
   Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021. AAAI Press, 7271–7278. https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/16893
Kevin Ellis, Daniel Ritchie, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2017. Learning to Infer Graphics Programs
   from Hand-Drawn Images. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1707.09627
Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell I. Nye, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Lucas Morales, Luke B. Hewitt, Luc Cary, Armando
   Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. 2021. DreamCoder: bootstrapping inductive program synthesis with wake-
   sleep library learning. In PLDI ’21: 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and
   Implementation, Virtual Event, Canada, June 20–25, 2021, Stephen N. Freund and Eran Yahav (Eds.). ACM, 835–850.
   https://doi.org/10.1145/3453483.3454080
Srinivasan Iyer, Alvin Cheung, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. Learning Programmatic Idioms for Scalable Semantic Parsing.
   https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1904.09086
R. Kenny Jones, David Charatan, Paul Guerrero, Niloy J. Mitra, and Daniel Ritchie. 2021. ShapeMOD: Macro Operation
   Discovery for 3D Shape Programs. ACM Trans. Graph. 40, 4, Article 153 (jul 2021), 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
   3450626.3459821
Tessa Lau, Steven A. Wolfman, Pedro Domingos, and Daniel S. Weld. 2001. Programming By Demonstration Using Version
   Space Algebra.
Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Dianhuan Lin, J. Swaroop Guntupalli, and Dileep George. 2018. Beyond imitation: Zero-shot task
   transfer on robots by learning concepts as cognitive programs. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1812.02788
28                                                   Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


Na Meng, Miryung Kim, and Kathryn S. McKinley. 2013. Lase: Locating and applying systematic edits by learning from
   examples. In 2013 35th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). 502–511. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.
   2013.6606596
Tom Michael Mitchell. 1977. Version Spaces: A Candidate Elimination Approach to Rule Learning. In IJCAI.
Chandrakana Nandi, James R. Wilcox, Pavel Panchekha, Taylor Blau, Dan Grossman, and Zachary Tatlock. 2018. Functional
   Programming for Compiling and Decompiling Computer-Aided Design. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2, ICFP, Article 99
   (jul 2018), 31 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3236794
Chandrakana Nandi, Max Willsey, Adam Anderson, James R. Wilcox, Eva Darulova, Dan Grossman, and Zachary Tatlock.
   2020. Synthesizing structured CAD models with equality saturation and inverse transformations. In Proceedings of the 41st
   ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2020, London, UK,
   June 15–20, 2020, Alastair F. Donaldson and Emina Torlak (Eds.). ACM, 31–44. https://doi.org/10.1145/3385412.3386012
Chandrakana Nandi, Max Willsey, Amy Zhu, Yisu Remy Wang, Brett Saiki, Adam Anderson, Adriana Schulz, Dan Grossman,
   and Zachary Tatlock. 2021. Rewrite Rule Inference Using Equality Saturation. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5, OOPSLA,
   Article 119 (oct 2021), 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3485496
Pavel Panchekha, Alex Sanchez-Stern, James R. Wilcox, and Zachary Tatlock. 2015. Automatically Improving Accuracy for
   Floating Point Expressions. SIGPLAN Not. 50, 6 (jun 2015), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/2813885.2737959
Gordon Plotkin. 1970. Lattice Theoretic Properties of Subsumption. Edinburgh University, Department of Machine Intelligence
   and Perception. https://books.google.com/books?id=2p09cgAACAAJ
Mohammad Raza, Natasa Milic-Frayling, and Sumit Gulwani. 2014. Programming by Example using Least General
   Generalizations. AAAI - Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. https://www.microsoft.com/en-
   us/research/publication/programming-by-example-using-least-general-generalizations/
John C. Reynolds. 1969. Transformational systems and the algebraic structure of atomic formulas.
Rodrigo C. O. Rocha, Pavlos Petoumenos, Björn Franke, Pramod Bhatotia, and Michael O’Boyle. 2022. Loop Rolling for
   Code Size Reduction. In 2022 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization (CGO), Jae W. Lee,
   Sebastian Hack, and Tatiana Shpeisman (Eds.). IEEE, 217–229. https://doi.org/10.1109/CGO53902.2022.9741256
Reudismam Rolim, Gustavo Soares, Loris D’Antoni, Oleksandr Polozov, Sumit Gulwani, Rohit Gheyi, Ryo Suzuki, and Björn
   Hartmann. 2017. Learning Syntactic Program Transformations from Examples. In Proceedings of the 39th International
   Conference on Software Engineering (Buenos Aires, Argentina) (ICSE ’17). IEEE Press, 404–415. https://doi.org/10.1109/
   ICSE.2017.44
Gopal Sharma, Rishabh Goyal, Difan Liu, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Subhransu Maji. 2017. CSGNet: Neural Shape Parser
   for Constructive Solid Geometry. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1712.08290
Eui Chul Shin, Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, and Alex Polozov. 2019. Program Synthesis and Semantic Parsing
   with Learned Code Idioms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
   F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Eds.), Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/
   file/cff34ad343b069ea6920464ad17d4bcf-Paper.pdf
Eytan Singher and Shachar Itzhaky. 2021. Theory Exploration Powered by Deductive Synthesis. In Computer Aided
   Verification, Alexandra Silva and K. Rustan M. Leino (Eds.). Springer International Publishing, Cham, 125–148.
G. Stiff and F. Vahid. 2005. New Decompilation Techniques for Binary-Level Co-Processor Generation. In Proceedings of the
   2005 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (San Jose, CA) (ICCAD ’05). IEEE Computer Society,
   USA, 547–554.
Bogong Su, Shiyuan Ding, and Lan Jin. 1984. An Improvement of Trace Scheduling for Global Microcode Compaction.
   SIGMICRO Newsl. 15, 4 (dec 1984), 78–85. https://doi.org/10.1145/384281.808217
Ross Tate, Michael Stepp, Zachary Tatlock, and Sorin Lerner. 2009. Equality Saturation: A New Approach to Optimization.
   In Proceedings of the 36th annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages. 264–276.
Yonglong Tian, Andrew Luo, Xingyuan Sun, Kevin Ellis, William T. Freeman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. 2019.
   Learning to Infer and Execute 3D Shape Programs. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1901.02875
Alexa VanHattum, Rachit Nigam, Vincent T. Lee, James Bornholt, and Adrian Sampson. 2021. Vectorization for Digital Signal
   Processors via Equality Saturation. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
   Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Virtual, USA) (ASPLOS 2021). Association for Computing Machinery,
   New York, NY, USA, 874–886. https://doi.org/10.1145/3445814.3446707
Haoliang Wang, Nadia Polikarpova, and Judith E. Fan. 2021. Learning part-based abstractions for visual object concepts. In
   Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Vol. 43. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9009w415
Yisu Remy Wang, Shana Hutchison, Jonathan Leang, Bill Howe, and Dan Suciu. 2020. SPORES: Sum-Product Optimization
   via Relational Equality Saturation for Large Scale Linear Algebra. Proc. VLDB Endow. 13, 12 (jul 2020), 1919–1932.
   https://doi.org/10.14778/3407790.3407799
Max Willsey, Chandrakana Nandi, Yisu Remy Wang, Oliver Flatt, Zachary Tatlock, and Pavel Panchekha. 2021. Egg: Fast
   and Extensible Equality Saturation. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 5, POPL (2021), 1–29.
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                                        29


Catherine Wong, Kevin Ellis, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jacob Andreas. 2021. Leveraging Language to Learn Program
   Abstractions and Search Heuristics. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2106.11053
Catherine Wong, William P. McCarthy, Gabriel Grand, Yoni Friedman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Jacob Andreas, Robert D.
   Hawkins, and Judith E. Fan. 2022. Identifying concept libraries from language about object structure. In Proceedings of
   the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Chenming Wu, Haisen Zhao, Chandrakana Nandi, Jeffrey I. Lipton, Zachary Tatlock, and Adriana Schulz. 2019. Carpentry
   Compiler. ACM Trans. Graph. 38, 6, Article 195 (nov 2019), 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3355089.3356518
Yichen Yang, Phitchaya Phothilimthana, Yisu Wang, Max Willsey, Sudip Roy, and Jacques Pienaar. 2021. Equality Saturation
   for Tensor Graph Superoptimization. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, A. Smola, A. Dimakis, and I. Stoica
   (Eds.), Vol. 3. 255–268. https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper/2021/file/65ded5353c5ee48d0b7d48c591b8f430-Paper.pdf
30                                                 Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


A     PROOFS
     Proposition A.1. The language of compressed terms is strongly normalizing.
   Proof. Consider evaluating 𝑡ˆ in applicative order (leftmost innermost). In this case, any left-hand
size of a 𝛽-reduction has no inner 𝛽-redexes. Since in our language a 𝜆-abstraction can only be on
the left-hand side of a 𝛽-redex, it means that expression being reduced has no inner 𝜆-abstractions.
For that reason, the number of 𝜆-abstractions in an expression strictly decreases with every 𝛽-step
(the sole one in the reduced redex disappears, and all other 𝜆-abstractions are outside of the reduced
redex, and hence unchanged).                                                                          □
                                       𝜅 (𝑝 ′ )
 Lemma A.2. Given a 𝜅-step 𝑡ˆ1 →1                 𝑡ˆ2 if a pattern 𝑝 has 𝑁 matches in 𝑡ˆ2 , it also has at least 𝑁
matches in 𝑡ˆ1 .
     Proof. There are four cases for what 𝑝 can match in 𝑡ˆ2 :
      • a subterm that does not overlap with the newly introduced 𝛽-redex: in this case, the match is
        unaffected by the 𝜅-step;
      • a subterm inside an actual argument of the 𝛽-redex: this actual argument becomes a sub-term
        of 𝑡ˆ1 ;
      • a sub-term inside the body of the 𝛽-redex: 𝑡ˆ1 has a sub-term that is more specific than the
        body, and hence still matches 𝑝;
      • a sub-term that includes the entire 𝛽-redex inside: since 𝑝 is first order, it cannot mention the
        redex, so the redex must be contained entirely inside the substitution; hence again the match
        is unaffected by the 𝜅-step.
                                                                                                        □
   Theorem A.3 (Soundness and Completeness of Pattern-Based Library Learning). For any
term 𝑡 ∈ T (Σ) and compressed term 𝑡ˆ ∈ T̂ (Σ, X):
(Soundness) If 𝑡 compresses into 𝑡ˆ, then 𝑡ˆ evaluates to 𝑡: ∀P.𝑡 →𝜅 ( P) 𝑡ˆ =⇒ 𝑡ˆ →𝛽 𝑡.
(Completeness) If 𝑡ˆ is a solution to the (global) library learning problem, then 𝑡 compresses into 𝑡ˆ
      using only patterns that have a match in 𝑡: 𝑡ˆ ∈ arg min𝑡ˆ′ →𝛽 𝑡 size(𝑡ˆ′) =⇒ 𝑡 →𝜅 ( P) 𝑡ˆ, where
      P = {𝑝 ∈ T (Σ, X) | 𝑡 ′ ∈ subterms(𝑡), 𝑡 ′ ⊑ 𝑝}.

   Proof. The soundness is trivial because inverting any 𝜅-rewrite gives a valid 𝛽-reduction.
   The other direction (completeness) is more involved. First let us prove that 𝑡ˆ can be obtain by any
compression, regardless of whether the patterns occur in 𝑡. This is non-trivial because inverting a
𝛽-reduction (𝜆𝑋  𝑡ˆ1 ) 𝑡ˆ2 →1 𝑡ˆ′ does not always correspond to a well-form 𝜅-step, for two reasons:
                                𝛽

(a) 𝑡ˆ1 itself contains 𝜆-abstractions (and hence does not correspond to a pattern); (b) 𝑋 ≠ vars(𝑡ˆ1 ).
To overcome point (a), note that in an applicative evaluation, both 𝑡ˆ1 and 𝑡ˆ2 contain no 𝛽-redexes
(and hence no 𝜆-abstractions). Hence 𝑡ˆ1 is a valid pattern.
   For point (b), there are two cases: either (1) vars(𝑡ˆ1 ) ⊊ 𝑋 or (2) vars(𝑡ˆ1 ) ⊋ 𝑋 . Consider case (1).
In this case, the compressed term 𝑡ˆ has 𝜆-bindings that are not used in their bodies. Such a term
cannot possibly be minimal. Removing unused bindings makes each individual 𝛽-redex smaller
and cannot remove sharing, so it always makes the overall term smaller as well.
   Now consider case (2). This means that 𝜆𝑋  𝑡ˆ1 has free variables, which must be defined in
outer 𝜆-abstractions. However, using such a 𝜆-abstraction contradicts the assumption that we are
only interested in global library learning.
   Finally, let us prove that all patterns used in the compression have a match in 𝑡. Consider a
                           𝜅 (𝑝 )         𝜅 (𝑝 )
compression 𝑡 = 𝑡ˆ0 →1 1 𝑡ˆ1 . . . →1 𝑛 𝑡ˆ𝑛 = 𝑡ˆ. Clearly, each pattern 𝑝𝑖 has a match in the
Learning Better Abstractions with E-Graphs and Anti-Unification                                       31


(compressed) term 𝑡ˆ𝑖−1 , by definition of the 𝜅-rewrite. Hence, it also occurs in 𝑡, by induction using
Lemma A.2.                                                                                             □
32                                                                                             Cao, D., Kunkel, R., Nandi, C., Willsey, M., Tatlock Z., Polikarpova, N.


B                     ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS

                                                                                        Babble r=2                                                                                            Babble r=2
                                                                                        Babble r=10                                                                                           Babble r=10
                                                                                                                                   103
                                                                                        Babble r=20                                                                                           Babble r=20
                                                                                        DreamCoder                                                                                            DreamCoder

                 102




Time (seconds)                                                                                                    Time (seconds)
                                                                                                                                   102

                 101




                 100                                                                                                               101


                          1.0   1.1        1.2          1.3                             1.4                                                 1.0   1.2     1.4      1.6    1.8     2.0   2.2      2.4    2.6
                                        Compression Ratio                                                                                                         Compression Ratio



                                 (a) List domain                                                                                                        (b) Physics domain
                      3
                 10                                                                     Babble r=2
                                                                                        Babble r=10
                                                                                        Babble r=20
                                                                                        DreamCoder
                                                                                                                                   103
                 102




Time (seconds)                                                                                                    Time (seconds)
                                                                                                                                                                                              Babble r=2
                                                                                                                                                                                              Babble r=10
                                                                                                                                        2
                 101                                                                                                               10                                                         Babble r=20
                                                                                                                                                                                              DreamCoder




                 100                                                                                                               101




                          1.0     1.1            1.2                              1.3               1.4                                           1.1           1.2          1.3        1.4            1.5
                                        Compression Ratio                                                                                                         Compression Ratio


                                 (c) Text domain                                                                                                          (d) Logo domain

                                                                   103




                                                                   102




                                                 Time (seconds)
                                                                                                                                                    Babble r=2
                                                                                                                                                    Babble r=10
                                                                        1
                                                                   10                                                                               Babble r=20
                                                                                                                                                    DreamCoder



                                                                   100




                                                                  10−1

                                                                            1.0               1.2            1.4            1.6                         1.8
                                                                                                          Compression Ratio


                                                                                              (e) Towers domain

Fig. 15. babble’s default configuration runs for 20 rounds (r=20) to learn additional library functions. This
plot shows the data from Fig. 12, but with additional babble configuration running fewer rounds. With fewer
rounds, babble runs faster but compresses worse.
